The title of the webpage is "Internet - Wikipedia".
The contents of the webpage are as follows: 


Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk
Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Main page
	Bullet Point 2: Contents
	Bullet Point 3: Current events
	Bullet Point 4: Random article
	Bullet Point 5: About Wikipedia
	Bullet Point 6: Contact us
	Bullet Point 7: Donate
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Help
	Bullet Point 2: Learn to edit
	Bullet Point 3: Community portal
	Bullet Point 4: Recent changes
	Bullet Point 5: Upload file
The webpage contains an image of a Wikipedia here.
The webpage contains an image of a The Free Encyclopedia here.
The webpage contains a form with a div, a search named "search", a hidden named "title", a submit named "fulltext", a submit named "go", 
Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Create account
	Bullet Point 2: Log in
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1:  Create account
	Bullet Point 2:  Log in
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Contributions
	Bullet Point 2: Talk
Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents





Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Terminology







2History







3Governance







4Infrastructure


				Toggle Infrastructure subsection
			




4.1Service tiers







4.2Access





4.2.1Mobile communication











5Internet Protocol Suite


				Toggle Internet Protocol Suite subsection
			




5.1Internet protocol





5.1.1IP Addresses







5.1.2IPv4







5.1.3IPv6







5.1.4Subnetwork







5.1.5Routing









5.2IETF









6Applications and services


				Toggle Applications and services subsection
			




6.1World Wide Web







6.2Communication







6.3Data transfer









7Social impact


				Toggle Social impact subsection
			




7.1Users







7.2Usage







7.3Social networking and entertainment







7.4Electronic business







7.5Remote work







7.6Collaborative publishing







7.7Politics and political revolutions







7.8Philanthropy









8Security


				Toggle Security subsection
			




8.1Malware







8.2Surveillance







8.3Censorship









9Performance


				Toggle Performance subsection
			




9.1Traffic volume







9.2Outages







9.3Energy use









10See also







11Notes







12References







13Sources







14Further reading







15External links









Internet




212 languages



AcèhAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛअंगिकाÆngliscالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐArmãneashtiঅসমীয়াAsturianuअवधीAvañe'ẽAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBamanankanবাংলাBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChiShonaChiTumbukaCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEmiliàn e rumagnòlЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalego贛語ગુજરાતી客家語/Hak-kâ-ngîХальмг한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIgboIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitutИронIsiZuluÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡKapampanganქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаລາວLatgaļuLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingálaLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa Melayuꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟMinangkabau閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語NapulitanoНохчийнNordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandOccitanОлык марийଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPangasinanپنجابیPapiamentuپښتوPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPiemontèisTok PisinPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaQırımtatarcaRipoarischRomânăRumantschRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаसंस्कृतम्SängöᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSarduScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСловѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча / tatarçaతెలుగుTetunไทยThuɔŋjäŋТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩತುಳುTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWalonWest-VlamsWinarayWolof吴语XitsongaייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文203 more
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

View source

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadView sourceView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata itemEdit interlanguage links




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikiversity





















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Global system of connected computer networks
This article is about the worldwide computer network. For the global system of pages accessed via URLs, see World Wide Web. For other uses, see Internet (disambiguation).


This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Internet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


InternetAn Opte Project visualization of routing paths through a portion of the Internet
hideGeneral
Access
Activism
Censorship
Data activism
Democracy
Digital divide
Digital rights
Freedom
Freedom of information
Internet phenomena
Net neutrality
Privacy
Right to Internet access
Slacktivism
Sociology
Usage
Vigilantism
Virtual community
Virtual volunteering

hideGovernance
IGF
NRO
IANA
ICANN
IETF
ISOC

hideInformation infrastructure
Domain Name System
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Internet exchange point
Internet protocol suite
Internet Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol
Internet service provider
IP address
Internet Message Access Protocol
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol

hideServices
Blogs
Microblogging
Email
Fax
File sharing
File transfer
Games
Instant messaging
Podcasts
Shopping
Television
Voice over IP
World Wide Web
search

hideHistory
History of the Internet
Oldest domain names
Pioneers
Protocol Wars

hideGuides
 Index
Outline

 Internet portalvte
Computer network typesby scale
Nanoscale
Near-field (NFC)
Body
Personal (PAN)
Near-me
Local (LAN)
Storage (SAN)
Wireless (WLAN)
Virtual (VLAN)
Home (HAN)
Building
Campus (CAN)
Backbone
Metropolitan (MAN)
Municipal wireless (MWN)
Wide (WAN)
Cloud
Internet
Interplanetary Internet
vte
The Internet (or internet)[a] is the global system of interconnected computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP)[b] to communicate between networks and devices. It is a network of networks that consists of private, public, academic, business, and government networks of local to global scope, linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies. The Internet carries a vast range of information resources and services, such as the interlinked hypertext documents and applications of the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, telephony, and file sharing.
The origins of the Internet date back to the development of packet switching and research commissioned by the United States Department of Defense in the late 1960s to enable time-sharing of computers.[2] The primary precursor network, the ARPANET, initially served as a backbone for the interconnection of regional academic and military networks in the 1970s to enable resource sharing. The funding of the National Science Foundation Network as a new backbone in the 1980s, as well as private funding for other commercial extensions, led to worldwide participation in the development of new networking technologies, and the merger of many networks.[3] The linking of commercial networks and enterprises by the early 1990s marked the beginning of the transition to the modern Internet,[4] and generated a sustained exponential growth as generations of institutional, personal, and mobile computers were connected to the network. Although the Internet was widely used by academia in the 1980s, commercialization incorporated its services and technologies into virtually every aspect of modern life.
Most traditional communication media, including telephone, radio, television, paper mail, and newspapers, are reshaped, redefined, or even bypassed by the Internet, giving birth to new services such as email, Internet telephone, Internet television, online music, digital newspapers, and video streaming websites. Newspaper, book, and other print publishing have adapted to website technology or have been reshaped into blogging, web feeds, and online news aggregators. The Internet has enabled and accelerated new forms of personal interaction through instant messaging, Internet forums, and social networking services. Online shopping has grown exponentially for major retailers, small businesses, and entrepreneurs, as it enables firms to extend their "brick and mortar" presence to serve a larger market or even sell goods and services entirely online. Business-to-business and financial services on the Internet affect supply chains across entire industries.
The Internet has no single centralized governance in either technological implementation or policies for access and usage; each constituent network sets its own policies.[5] The overarching definitions of the two principal name spaces on the Internet, the Internet Protocol address (IP address) space and the Domain Name System (DNS), are directed by a maintainer organization, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise.[6] In November 2006, the Internet was included on USA Today's list of New Seven Wonders.[7]


Terminology
Further information: Capitalization of Internet and internetworking
The word internetted was used as early as 1849, meaning interconnected or interwoven.[8] The word Internet was used in 1945 by the United States War Department in a radio operator's manual,[9] and 1974 as the shorthand form of Internetwork.[10] Today, the term Internet most commonly refers to the global system of interconnected computer networks, though it may also refer to any group of smaller networks.[11]
When it came into common use, most publications treated the word Internet as a capitalized proper noun; this has become less common.[11] This reflects the tendency in English to capitalize new terms and move to lowercase as they become familiar.[11][12] The word is sometimes still capitalized to distinguish the global internet from smaller networks, though many publications, including the AP Stylebook since 2016, recommend the lowercase form in every case.[11][12] In 2016, the Oxford English Dictionary found that, based on a study of around 2.5 billion printed and online sources, "Internet" was capitalized in 54% of cases.[13]
The terms Internet and World Wide Web are often used interchangeably; it is common to speak of "going on the Internet" when using a web browser to view web pages. However, the World Wide Web or the Web is only one of a large number of Internet services,[14] a collection of documents (web pages) and other web resources, linked by hyperlinks and URLs.[15]

History
Main articles: History of the Internet and History of the World Wide Web
In the 1960s, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defense (DoD) funded research into time-sharing of computers.[16][17][18] J. C. R. Licklider proposed the idea of a universal network while leading the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) at ARPA. Research into packet switching, one of the fundamental Internet technologies, started in the work of Paul Baran in the early 1960s and, independently, Donald Davies in 1965.[2][19] After the Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in 1967, packet switching from the proposed NPL network was incorporated into the design for the ARPANET and other resource sharing networks such as the Merit Network and CYCLADES, which were developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s.[20]
ARPANET development began with two network nodes which were interconnected between the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and SRI International (SRI) on 29 October 1969.[21] The third site was at the University of California, Santa Barbara, followed by the University of Utah. In a sign of future growth, 15 sites were connected to the young ARPANET by the end of 1971.[22][23] These early years were documented in the 1972 film Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing.[24] Thereafter, the ARPANET gradually developed into a decentralized communications network, connecting remote centers and military bases in the United States.[25]
Early international collaborations for the ARPANET were rare. Connections were made in 1973 to the Norwegian Seismic Array (NORSAR),[26] and to University College London which provided a gateway to British academic networks forming the first international resource sharing network.[27] ARPA projects, international working groups and commercial initiatives led to the development of various protocols and standards by which multiple separate networks could become a single network or "a network of networks".[28] In 1974, Bob Kahn at DARPA and Vint Cerf at Stanford University published their ideas for "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication".[29] They used the term internet as a shorthand for internetwork in RFC 675,[10] and later RFCs repeated this use. Kahn and Cerf credit Louis Pouzin with important influences on the resulting TCP/IP design.[30] National PTTs and commercial providers developed the X.25 standard and deployed it on public data networks.[31]
Access to the ARPANET was expanded in 1981 when the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded the Computer Science Network (CSNET). In 1982, the Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) was standardized, which permitted worldwide proliferation of interconnected networks. TCP/IP network access expanded again in 1986 when the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNet) provided access to supercomputer sites in the United States for researchers, first at speeds of 56 kbit/s and later at 1.5 Mbit/s and 45 Mbit/s.[32] The NSFNet expanded into academic and research organizations in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Japan in 1988–89.[33][34][35][36] Although other network protocols such as UUCP and PTT public data networks had global reach well before this time, this marked the beginning of the Internet as an intercontinental network. Commercial Internet service providers (ISPs) emerged in 1989 in the United States and Australia.[37] The ARPANET was decommissioned in 1990.[38]

 T3 NSFNET Backbone, c. 1992
Steady advances in semiconductor technology and optical networking created new economic opportunities for commercial involvement in the expansion of the network in its core and for delivering services to the public. In mid-1989, MCI Mail and Compuserve established connections to the Internet, delivering email and public access products to the half million users of the Internet.[39] Just months later, on 1 January 1990, PSInet launched an alternate Internet backbone for commercial use; one of the networks that added to the core of the commercial Internet of later years. In March 1990, the first high-speed T1 (1.5 Mbit/s) link between the NSFNET and Europe was installed between Cornell University and CERN, allowing much more robust communications than were capable with satellites.[40] Six months later Tim Berners-Lee would begin writing WorldWideWeb, the first web browser, after two years of lobbying CERN management. By Christmas 1990, Berners-Lee had built all the tools necessary for a working Web: the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 0.9,[41] the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), the first Web browser (which was also an HTML editor and could access Usenet newsgroups and FTP files), the first HTTP server software (later known as CERN httpd), the first web server,[42] and the first Web pages that described the project itself. In 1991 the Commercial Internet eXchange was founded, allowing PSInet to communicate with the other commercial networks CERFnet and Alternet. Stanford Federal Credit Union was the first financial institution to offer online Internet banking services to all of its members in October 1994.[43] In 1996, OP Financial Group, also a cooperative bank, became the second online bank in the world and the first in Europe.[44] By 1995, the Internet was fully commercialized in the U.S. when the NSFNet was decommissioned, removing the last restrictions on use of the Internet to carry commercial traffic.[45]


Worldwide Internet users[46]


Users
2005
2010
2017
2019
2021


World population[47]

6.5 billion

6.9 billion

7.4 billion

7.75 billion

7.9 billion


Worldwide

16%

30%

48%

53.6%

63%


In developing world

8%

21%

41.3%

47%

57%


In developed world

51%

67%

81%

86.6%

90%

As technology advanced and commercial opportunities fueled reciprocal growth, the volume of Internet traffic started experiencing similar characteristics as that of the scaling of MOS transistors, exemplified by Moore's law, doubling every 18 months. This growth, formalized as Edholm's law, was catalyzed by advances in MOS technology, laser light wave systems, and noise performance.[48]
Since 1995, the Internet has tremendously impacted culture and commerce, including the rise of near-instant communication by email, instant messaging, telephony (Voice over Internet Protocol or VoIP), two-way interactive video calls, and the World Wide Web[49] with its discussion forums, blogs, social networking services, and online shopping sites. Increasing amounts of data are transmitted at higher and higher speeds over fiber optic networks operating at 1 Gbit/s, 10 Gbit/s, or more. The Internet continues to grow, driven by ever-greater amounts of online information and knowledge, commerce, entertainment and social networking services.[50] During the late 1990s, it was estimated that traffic on the public Internet grew by 100 percent per year, while the mean annual growth in the number of Internet users was thought to be between 20% and 50%.[51] This growth is often attributed to the lack of central administration, which allows organic growth of the network, as well as the non-proprietary nature of the Internet protocols, which encourages vendor interoperability and prevents any one company from exerting too much control over the network.[52] As of 31 March 2011[update], the estimated total number of Internet users was 2.095 billion (30.2% of world population).[53] It is estimated that in 1993 the Internet carried only 1% of the information flowing through two-way telecommunication. By 2000 this figure had grown to 51%, and by 2007 more than 97% of all telecommunicated information was carried over the Internet.[54]

Governance
Main article: Internet governance
 ICANN headquarters in the Playa Vista neighborhood of Los Angeles, California, United States
The Internet is a global network that comprises many voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks. It operates without a central governing body. The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise. To maintain interoperability, the principal name spaces of the Internet are administered by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). ICANN is governed by an international board of directors drawn from across the Internet technical, business, academic, and other non-commercial communities. ICANN coordinates the assignment of unique identifiers for use on the Internet, including domain names, IP addresses, application port numbers in the transport protocols, and many other parameters. Globally unified name spaces are essential for maintaining the global reach of the Internet. This role of ICANN distinguishes it as perhaps the only central coordinating body for the global Internet.[55]
Regional Internet registries (RIRs) were established for five regions of the world. The African Network Information Center (AfriNIC) for Africa, the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) for North America, the Asia-Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC) for Asia and the Pacific region, the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry (LACNIC) for Latin America and the Caribbean region, and the Réseaux IP Européens – Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) for Europe, the Middle East, and Central Asia were delegated to assign IP address blocks and other Internet parameters to local registries, such as Internet service providers, from a designated pool of addresses set aside for each region.
The National Telecommunications and Information Administration, an agency of the United States Department of Commerce, had final approval over changes to the DNS root zone until the IANA stewardship transition on 1 October 2016.[56][57][58][59] The Internet Society (ISOC) was founded in 1992 with a mission to "assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world".[60] Its members include individuals (anyone may join) as well as corporations, organizations, governments, and universities. Among other activities ISOC provides an administrative home for a number of less formally organized groups that are involved in developing and managing the Internet, including: the IETF, Internet Architecture Board (IAB), Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), and Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG). On 16 November 2005, the United Nations-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis established the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to discuss Internet-related issues.

Infrastructure
See also: List of countries by number of Internet users and List of countries by Internet connection speeds
 2007 map showing submarine fiberoptic telecommunication cables around the world
The communications infrastructure of the Internet consists of its hardware components and a system of software layers that control various aspects of the architecture. As with any computer network, the Internet physically consists of routers, media (such as cabling and radio links), repeaters, modems etc. However, as an example of internetworking, many of the network nodes are not necessarily internet equipment per se, the internet packets are carried by other full-fledged networking protocols with the Internet acting as a homogeneous networking standard, running across heterogeneous hardware, with the packets guided to their destinations by IP routers.

Service tiers
 Packet routing across the Internet involves several tiers of Internet service providers.
Internet service providers (ISPs) establish the worldwide connectivity between individual networks at various levels of scope. End-users who only access the Internet when needed to perform a function or obtain information, represent the bottom of the routing hierarchy. At the top of the routing hierarchy are the tier 1 networks, large telecommunication companies that exchange traffic directly with each other via very high speed fiber-optic cables and governed by peering agreements. Tier 2 and lower-level networks buy Internet transit from other providers to reach at least some parties on the global Internet, though they may also engage in peering. An ISP may use a single upstream provider for connectivity, or implement multihoming to achieve redundancy and load balancing. Internet exchange points are major traffic exchanges with physical connections to multiple ISPs. Large organizations, such as academic institutions, large enterprises, and governments, may perform the same function as ISPs, engaging in peering and purchasing transit on behalf of their internal networks. Research networks tend to interconnect with large subnetworks such as GEANT, GLORIAD, Internet2, and the UK's national research and education network, JANET.

Access
Common methods of Internet access by users include dial-up with a computer modem via telephone circuits, broadband over coaxial cable, fiber optics or copper wires, Wi-Fi, satellite, and cellular telephone technology (e.g. 3G, 4G). The Internet may often be accessed from computers in libraries and Internet cafés. Internet access points exist in many public places such as airport halls and coffee shops. Various terms are used, such as public Internet kiosk, public access terminal, and Web payphone. Many hotels also have public terminals that are usually fee-based. These terminals are widely accessed for various usages, such as ticket booking, bank deposit, or online payment. Wi-Fi provides wireless access to the Internet via local computer networks. Hotspots providing such access include Wi-Fi cafés, where users need to bring their own wireless devices, such as a laptop or PDA. These services may be free to all, free to customers only, or fee-based.
Grassroots efforts have led to wireless community networks. Commercial Wi-Fi services that cover large areas are available in many cities, such as New York, London, Vienna, Toronto, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago and Pittsburgh, where the Internet can then be accessed from places such as a park bench.[61] Experiments have also been conducted with proprietary mobile wireless networks like Ricochet, various high-speed data services over cellular networks, and fixed wireless services. Modern smartphones can also access the Internet through the cellular carrier network. For Web browsing, these devices provide applications such as Google Chrome, Safari, and Firefox and a wide variety of other Internet software may be installed from app stores. Internet usage by mobile and tablet devices exceeded desktop worldwide for the first time in October 2016.[62]

Mobile communication
 Number of mobile cellular subscriptions 2012–2016 The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) estimated that, by the end of 2017, 48% of individual users regularly connect to the Internet, up from 34% in 2012.[63] Mobile Internet connectivity has played an important role in expanding access in recent years, especially in Asia and the Pacific and in Africa.[64] The number of unique mobile cellular subscriptions increased from 3.89 billion in 2012 to 4.83 billion in 2016, two-thirds of the world's population, with more than half of subscriptions located in Asia and the Pacific. The number of subscriptions is predicted to rise to 5.69 billion users in 2020.[65] As of 2016[update], almost 60% of the world's population had access to a 4G broadband cellular network, up from almost 50% in 2015 and 11% in 2012.[disputed  – discuss][65] The limits that users face on accessing information via mobile applications coincide with a broader process of fragmentation of the Internet. Fragmentation restricts access to media content and tends to affect the poorest users the most.[64]
Zero-rating, the practice of Internet service providers allowing users free connectivity to access specific content or applications without cost, has offered opportunities to surmount economic hurdles but has also been accused by its critics as creating a two-tiered Internet. To address the issues with zero-rating, an alternative model has emerged in the concept of 'equal rating' and is being tested in experiments by Mozilla and Orange in Africa. Equal rating prevents prioritization of one type of content and zero-rates all content up to a specified data cap. In a study published by Chatham House, 15 out of 19 countries researched in Latin America had some kind of hybrid or zero-rated product offered. Some countries in the region had a handful of plans to choose from (across all mobile network operators) while others, such as Colombia, offered as many as 30 pre-paid and 34 post-paid plans.[66]
A study of eight countries in the Global South found that zero-rated data plans exist in every country, although there is a great range in the frequency with which they are offered and actually used in each.[67] The study looked at the top three to five carriers by market share in Bangladesh, Colombia, Ghana, India, Kenya, Nigeria, Peru and Philippines. Across the 181 plans examined, 13 percent were offering zero-rated services. Another study, covering Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa, found Facebook's Free Basics and Wikipedia Zero to be the most commonly zero-rated content.[68]

Internet Protocol Suite
Internet protocol suite
Application layer
BGP
DHCP (v6)
DNS
FTP
HTTP (HTTP/3)
HTTPS
IMAP
IRC
LDAP
MGCP
MQTT
NNTP
NTP
OSPF
POP
PTP
ONC/RPC
RTP
RTSP
RIP
SIP
SMTP
SNMP
SSH
Telnet
TLS/SSL
XMPP
more...

Transport layer
TCP
UDP
DCCP
SCTP
RSVP
QUIC
more...

Internet layer
IP
v4
v6
ICMP (v6)
NDP
ECN
IGMP
IPsec
more...

Link layer
Tunnels
PPP
MAC
more...
vte
The Internet standards describe a framework known as the Internet protocol suite (also called TCP/IP, based on the first two components.) This is a suite of protocols that are ordered into a set of four conceptional layers by the scope of their operation, originally documented in RFC 1122 and RFC 1123. At the top is the application layer, where communication is described in terms of the objects or data structures most appropriate for each application. For example, a web browser operates in a client–server application model and exchanges information with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and an application-germane data structure, such as the HyperText Markup Language (HTML).
Below this top layer, the transport layer connects applications on different hosts with a logical channel through the network. It provides this service with a variety of possible characteristics, such as ordered, reliable delivery (TCP), and an unreliable datagram service (UDP).
Underlying these layers are the networking technologies that interconnect networks at their borders and exchange traffic across them. The Internet layer implements the Internet Protocol (IP) which enables computers to identify and locate each other by IP address and route their traffic via intermediate (transit) networks.[69] The internet protocol layer code is independent of the type of network that it is physically running over.
At the bottom of the architecture is the link layer, which connects nodes on the same physical link, and contains protocols that do not require routers for traversal to other links. The protocol suite does not explicitly specify hardware methods to transfer bits, or protocols to manage such hardware, but assumes that appropriate technology is available. Examples of that technology include Wi-Fi, Ethernet, and DSL.

 As user data is processed through the protocol stack, each abstraction layer adds encapsulation information at the sending host. Data is transmitted over the wire at the link level between hosts and routers. Encapsulation is removed by the receiving host. Intermediate relays update link encapsulation at each hop, and inspect the IP layer for routing purposes.
Internet protocol
 Conceptual data flow in a simple network topology of two hosts (A and B) connected by a link between their respective routers. The application on each host executes read and write operations as if the processes were directly connected to each other by some kind of data pipe. After the establishment of this pipe, most details of the communication are hidden from each process, as the underlying principles of communication are implemented in the lower protocol layers. In analogy, at the transport layer the communication appears as host-to-host, without knowledge of the application data structures and the connecting routers, while at the internetworking layer, individual network boundaries are traversed at each router.
The most prominent component of the Internet model is the Internet Protocol (IP). IP enables internetworking and, in essence, establishes the Internet itself. Two versions of the Internet Protocol exist, IPv4 and IPv6.

IP Addresses
 A DNS resolver consults three name servers to resolve the domain name user-visible "www.wikipedia.org" to determine the IPv4 Address 207.142.131.234.
For locating individual computers on the network, the Internet provides IP addresses. IP addresses are used by the Internet infrastructure to direct internet packets to their destinations. They consist of fixed-length numbers, which are found within the packet. IP addresses are generally assigned to equipment either automatically via DHCP, or are configured.
However, the network also supports other addressing systems. Users generally enter domain names (e.g. "en.wikipedia.org") instead of IP addresses because they are easier to remember, they are converted by the Domain Name System (DNS) into IP addresses which are more efficient for routing purposes.

IPv4
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number.[69] IPv4 is the initial version used on the first generation of the Internet and is still in dominant use. It was designed to address up to ≈4.3 billion (109) hosts. However, the explosive growth of the Internet has led to IPv4 address exhaustion, which entered its final stage in 2011,[70] when the global IPv4 address allocation pool was exhausted.

IPv6
Because of the growth of the Internet and the depletion of available IPv4 addresses, a new version of IP IPv6, was developed in the mid-1990s, which provides vastly larger addressing capabilities and more efficient routing of Internet traffic. IPv6 uses 128 bits for the IP address and was standardized in 1998.[71][72][73] IPv6 deployment has been ongoing since the mid-2000s and is currently in growing deployment around the world, since Internet address registries (RIRs) began to urge all resource managers to plan rapid adoption and conversion.[74]
IPv6 is not directly interoperable by design with IPv4. In essence, it establishes a parallel version of the Internet not directly accessible with IPv4 software. Thus, translation facilities must exist for internetworking or nodes must have duplicate networking software for both networks. Essentially all modern computer operating systems support both versions of the Internet Protocol. Network infrastructure, however, has been lagging in this development. Aside from the complex array of physical connections that make up its infrastructure, the Internet is facilitated by bi- or multi-lateral commercial contracts, e.g., peering agreements, and by technical specifications or protocols that describe the exchange of data over the network. Indeed, the Internet is defined by its interconnections and routing policies.

Subnetwork
 Creating a subnet by dividing the host identifier
A subnetwork or subnet is a logical subdivision of an IP network.[75]: 1, 16  The practice of dividing a network into two or more networks is called subnetting.
Computers that belong to a subnet are addressed with an identical most-significant bit-group in their IP addresses. This results in the logical division of an IP address into two fields, the network number or routing prefix and the rest field or host identifier. The rest field is an identifier for a specific host or network interface.
The routing prefix may be expressed in Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation written as the first address of a network, followed by a slash character (/), and ending with the bit-length of the prefix. For example, 198.51.100.0/24 is the prefix of the Internet Protocol version 4 network starting at the given address, having 24 bits allocated for the network prefix, and the remaining 8 bits reserved for host addressing. Addresses in the range 198.51.100.0 to 198.51.100.255 belong to this network. The IPv6 address specification 2001:db8::/32 is a large address block with 296 addresses, having a 32-bit routing prefix.
For IPv4, a network may also be characterized by its subnet mask or netmask, which is the bitmask that when applied by a bitwise AND operation to any IP address in the network, yields the routing prefix. Subnet masks are also expressed in dot-decimal notation like an address. For example, 255.255.255.0 is the subnet mask for the prefix 198.51.100.0/24.
Traffic is exchanged between subnetworks through routers when the routing prefixes of the source address and the destination address differ. A router serves as a logical or physical boundary between the subnets.
The benefits of subnetting an existing network vary with each deployment scenario. In the address allocation architecture of the Internet using CIDR and in large organizations, it is necessary to allocate address space efficiently. Subnetting may also enhance routing efficiency, or have advantages in network management when subnetworks are administratively controlled by different entities in a larger organization. Subnets may be arranged logically in a hierarchical architecture, partitioning an organization's network address space into a tree-like routing structure.

Routing
Computers and routers use routing tables in their operating system to direct IP packets to reach a node on a different subnetwork. Routing tables are maintained by manual configuration or automatically by routing protocols. End-nodes typically use a default route that points toward an ISP providing transit, while ISP routers use the Border Gateway Protocol to establish the most efficient routing across the complex connections of the global Internet. The default gateway is the node that serves as the forwarding host (router) to other networks when no other route specification matches the destination IP address of a packet.[76][77]

IETF
While the hardware components in the Internet infrastructure can often be used to support other software systems, it is the design and the standardization process of the software that characterizes the Internet and provides the foundation for its scalability and success. The responsibility for the architectural design of the Internet software systems has been assumed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).[78] The IETF conducts standard-setting work groups, open to any individual, about the various aspects of Internet architecture. The resulting contributions and standards are published as Request for Comments (RFC) documents on the IETF web site. The principal methods of networking that enable the Internet are contained in specially designated RFCs that constitute the Internet Standards. Other less rigorous documents are simply informative, experimental, or historical, or document the best current practices (BCP) when implementing Internet technologies.

Applications and services
The Internet carries many applications and services, most prominently the World Wide Web, including social media, electronic mail, mobile applications, multiplayer online games, Internet telephony, file sharing, and streaming media services.
Most servers that provide these services are today hosted in data centers, and content is often accessed through high-performance content delivery networks.

World Wide Web
Main article: World Wide Web
 This NeXT Computer was used by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN and became the world's first Web server.
The World Wide Web is a global collection of documents, images, multimedia, applications, and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs), which provide a global system of named references. URIs symbolically identify services, web servers, databases, and the documents and resources that they can provide. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the main access protocol of the World Wide Web. Web services also use HTTP for communication between software systems for information transfer, sharing and exchanging business data and logistics and is one of many languages or protocols that can be used for communication on the Internet.[79]
World Wide Web browser software, such as Microsoft's Internet Explorer/Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Apple's Safari, and Google Chrome, lets users navigate from one web page to another via the hyperlinks embedded in the documents. These documents may also contain any combination of computer data, including graphics, sounds, text, video, multimedia and interactive content that runs while the user is interacting with the page. Client-side software can include animations, games, office applications and scientific demonstrations. Through keyword-driven Internet research using search engines like Yahoo!, Bing and Google, users worldwide have easy, instant access to a vast and diverse amount of online information. Compared to printed media, books, encyclopedias and traditional libraries, the World Wide Web has enabled the decentralization of information on a large scale.
The Web has enabled individuals and organizations to publish ideas and information to a potentially large audience online at greatly reduced expense and time delay. Publishing a web page, a blog, or building a website involves little initial cost and many cost-free services are available. However, publishing and maintaining large, professional web sites with attractive, diverse and up-to-date information is still a difficult and expensive proposition. Many individuals and some companies and groups use web logs or blogs, which are largely used as easily updatable online diaries. Some commercial organizations encourage staff to communicate advice in their areas of specialization in the hope that visitors will be impressed by the expert knowledge and free information, and be attracted to the corporation as a result.
Advertising on popular web pages can be lucrative, and e-commerce, which is the sale of products and services directly via the Web, continues to grow. Online advertising is a form of marketing and advertising which uses the Internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers. It includes email marketing, search engine marketing (SEM), social media marketing, many types of display advertising (including web banner advertising), and mobile advertising. In 2011, Internet advertising revenues in the United States surpassed those of cable television and nearly exceeded those of broadcast television.[80]: 19  Many common online advertising practices are controversial and increasingly subject to regulation.
When the Web developed in the 1990s, a typical web page was stored in completed form on a web server, formatted in HTML, ready for transmission to a web browser in response to a request. Over time, the process of creating and serving web pages has become dynamic, creating a flexible design, layout, and content. Websites are often created using content management software with, initially, very little content. Contributors to these systems, who may be paid staff, members of an organization or the public, fill underlying databases with content using editing pages designed for that purpose while casual visitors view and read this content in HTML form. There may or may not be editorial, approval and security systems built into the process of taking newly entered content and making it available to the target visitors.

Communication
Email is an important communications service available via the Internet. The concept of sending electronic text messages between parties, analogous to mailing letters or memos, predates the creation of the Internet.[81][82] Pictures, documents, and other files are sent as email attachments. Email messages can be cc-ed to multiple email addresses.
Internet telephony is a common communications service realized with the Internet. The name of the principal internetworking protocol, the Internet Protocol, lends its name to voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). The idea began in the early 1990s with walkie-talkie-like voice applications for personal computers. VoIP systems now dominate many markets and are as easy to use and as convenient as a traditional telephone. The benefit has been substantial cost savings over traditional telephone calls, especially over long distances. Cable, ADSL, and mobile data networks provide Internet access in customer premises[83] and inexpensive VoIP network adapters provide the connection for traditional analog telephone sets. The voice quality of VoIP often exceeds that of traditional calls. Remaining problems for VoIP include the situation that emergency services may not be universally available and that devices rely on a local power supply, while older traditional phones are powered from the local loop, and typically operate during a power failure.

Data transfer
File sharing is an example of transferring large amounts of data across the Internet. A computer file can be emailed to customers, colleagues and friends as an attachment. It can be uploaded to a website or File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server for easy download by others. It can be put into a "shared location" or onto a file server for instant use by colleagues. The load of bulk downloads to many users can be eased by the use of "mirror" servers or peer-to-peer networks. In any of these cases, access to the file may be controlled by user authentication, the transit of the file over the Internet may be obscured by encryption, and money may change hands for access to the file. The price can be paid by the remote charging of funds from, for example, a credit card whose details are also passed—usually fully encrypted—across the Internet. The origin and authenticity of the file received may be checked by digital signatures or by MD5 or other message digests. These simple features of the Internet, over a worldwide basis, are changing the production, sale, and distribution of anything that can be reduced to a computer file for transmission. This includes all manner of print publications, software products, news, music, film, video, photography, graphics and the other arts. This in turn has caused seismic shifts in each of the existing industries that previously controlled the production and distribution of these products.
Streaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users. Many radio and television broadcasters provide Internet feeds of their live audio and video productions. They may also allow time-shift viewing or listening such as Preview, Classic Clips and Listen Again features. These providers have been joined by a range of pure Internet "broadcasters" who never had on-air licenses. This means that an Internet-connected device, such as a computer or something more specific, can be used to access online media in much the same way as was previously possible only with a television or radio receiver. The range of available types of content is much wider, from specialized technical webcasts to on-demand popular multimedia services. Podcasting is a variation on this theme, where—usually audio—material is downloaded and played back on a computer or shifted to a portable media player to be listened to on the move. These techniques using simple equipment allow anybody, with little censorship or licensing control, to broadcast audio-visual material worldwide.
Digital media streaming increases the demand for network bandwidth. For example, standard image quality needs 1 Mbit/s link speed for SD 480p, HD 720p quality requires 2.5 Mbit/s, and the top-of-the-line HDX quality needs 4.5 Mbit/s for 1080p.[84]
Webcams are a low-cost extension of this phenomenon. While some webcams can give full-frame-rate video, the picture either is usually small or updates slowly. Internet users can watch animals around an African waterhole, ships in the Panama Canal, traffic at a local roundabout or monitor their own premises, live and in real time. Video chat rooms and video conferencing are also popular with many uses being found for personal webcams, with and without two-way sound. YouTube was founded on 15 February 2005 and is now the leading website for free streaming video with more than two billion users.[85] It uses an HTML5 based web player by default to stream and show video files.[86] Registered users may upload an unlimited amount of video and build their own personal profile. YouTube claims that its users watch hundreds of millions, and upload hundreds of thousands of videos daily.

Social impact
The Internet has enabled new forms of social interaction, activities, and social associations. This phenomenon has given rise to the scholarly study of the sociology of the Internet.
The early Internet left an impact on some writers who used symbolism to write about it, such as describing the Internet as a "means to connect individuals in a vast invisible net over all the earth."[87]

Users
See also: Global Internet usage, English in computing, and Languages used on the Internet
 Share of population using the Internet.[88] See or edit source data.
 Internet users per 100 population members and GDP per capita for selected countries
 Internet users per 100 inhabitantsSource: International Telecommunication Union.[89][90]
From 2000 to 2009, the number of Internet users globally rose from 394 million to 1.858 billion.[91] By 2010, 22 percent of the world's population had access to computers with 1 billion Google searches every day, 300 million Internet users reading blogs, and 2 billion videos viewed daily on YouTube.[92] In 2014 the world's Internet users surpassed 3 billion or 43.6 percent of world population, but two-thirds of the users came from richest countries, with 78.0 percent of Europe countries population using the Internet, followed by 57.4 percent of the Americas.[93] However, by 2018, Asia alone accounted for 51% of all Internet users, with 2.2 billion out of the 4.3 billion Internet users in the world coming from that region. The number of China's Internet users surpassed a major milestone in 2018, when the country's Internet regulatory authority, China Internet Network Information Centre, announced that China had 802 million Internet users.[94] By 2019, China was the world's leading country in terms of Internet users, with more than 800 million users, followed closely by India, with some 700 million users, with the United States a distant third with 275 million users. However, in terms of penetration, China has[when?] a 38.4% penetration rate compared to India's 40% and the United States's 80%.[95] As of 2020, it was estimated that 4.5 billion people use the Internet, more than half of the world's population.[96][97]
The prevalent language for communication via the Internet has always been English. This may be a result of the origin of the Internet, as well as the language's role as a lingua franca and as a world language. Early computer systems were limited to the characters in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a subset of the Latin alphabet.
After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are Chinese (25%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4% each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%).[98] By region, 42% of the world's Internet users are based in Asia, 24% in Europe, 14% in North America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean taken together, 6% in Africa, 3% in the Middle East and 1% in Australia/Oceania.[99] The Internet's technologies have developed enough in recent years, especially in the use of Unicode, that good facilities are available for development and communication in the world's widely used languages. However, some glitches such as mojibake (incorrect display of some languages' characters) still remain.
In an American study in 2005, the percentage of men using the Internet was very slightly ahead of the percentage of women, although this difference reversed in those under 30. Men logged on more often, spent more time online, and were more likely to be broadband users, whereas women tended to make more use of opportunities to communicate (such as email). Men were more likely to use the Internet to pay bills, participate in auctions, and for recreation such as downloading music and videos. Men and women were equally likely to use the Internet for shopping and banking.[100]
More recent studies indicate that in 2008, women significantly outnumbered men on most social networking services, such as Facebook and Myspace, although the ratios varied with age.[101] In addition, women watched more streaming content, whereas men downloaded more.[102] In terms of blogs, men were more likely to blog in the first place; among those who blog, men were more likely to have a professional blog, whereas women were more likely to have a personal blog.[103]
Splitting by country, in 2012 Iceland, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Denmark had the highest Internet penetration by the number of users, with 93% or more of the population with access.[104]
Several neologisms exist that refer to Internet users: Netizen (as in "citizen of the net")[105] refers to those actively involved in improving online communities, the Internet in general or surrounding political affairs and rights such as free speech,[106][107] Internaut refers to operators or technically highly capable users of the Internet,[108][109] digital citizen refers to a person using the Internet in order to engage in society, politics, and government participation.[110]





Internet users by language[98]





Website content languages[111]



Usage
 Internet users in 2015 as a percentage of a country's populationSource: International Telecommunication Union.[104]
Main articles: Global digital divide and Digital divide
 Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions in 2012as a percentage of a country's populationSource: International Telecommunication Union.[112]
 Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions in 2012as a percentage of a country's populationSource: International Telecommunication Union.[113]
The Internet allows greater flexibility in working hours and location, especially with the spread of unmetered high-speed connections. The Internet can be accessed almost anywhere by numerous means, including through mobile Internet devices. Mobile phones, datacards, handheld game consoles and cellular routers allow users to connect to the Internet wirelessly. Within the limitations imposed by small screens and other limited facilities of such pocket-sized devices, the services of the Internet, including email and the web, may be available. Service providers may restrict the services offered and mobile data charges may be significantly higher than other access methods.
Educational material at all levels from pre-school to post-doctoral is available from websites. Examples range from CBeebies, through school and high-school revision guides and virtual universities, to access to top-end scholarly literature through the likes of Google Scholar. For distance education, help with homework and other assignments, self-guided learning, whiling away spare time or just looking up more detail on an interesting fact, it has never been easier for people to access educational information at any level from anywhere. The Internet in general and the World Wide Web in particular are important enablers of both formal and informal education. Further, the Internet allows researchers (especially those from the social and behavioral sciences) to conduct research remotely via virtual laboratories, with profound changes in reach and generalizability of findings as well as in communication between scientists and in the publication of results.[114]
The low cost and nearly instantaneous sharing of ideas, knowledge, and skills have made collaborative work dramatically easier, with the help of collaborative software. Not only can a group cheaply communicate and share ideas but the wide reach of the Internet allows such groups more easily to form. An example of this is the free software movement, which has produced, among other things, Linux, Mozilla Firefox, and OpenOffice.org (later forked into LibreOffice). Internet chat, whether using an IRC chat room, an instant messaging system, or a social networking service, allows colleagues to stay in touch in a very convenient way while working at their computers during the day. Messages can be exchanged even more quickly and conveniently than via email. These systems may allow files to be exchanged, drawings and images to be shared, or voice and video contact between team members.
Content management systems allow collaborating teams to work on shared sets of documents simultaneously without accidentally destroying each other's work. Business and project teams can share calendars as well as documents and other information. Such collaboration occurs in a wide variety of areas including scientific research, software development, conference planning, political activism and creative writing. Social and political collaboration is also becoming more widespread as both Internet access and computer literacy spread.
The Internet allows computer users to remotely access other computers and information stores easily from any access point. Access may be with computer security, i.e. authentication and encryption technologies, depending on the requirements. This is encouraging new ways of remote work, collaboration and information sharing in many industries. An accountant sitting at home can audit the books of a company based in another country, on a server situated in a third country that is remotely maintained by IT specialists in a fourth. These accounts could have been created by home-working bookkeepers, in other remote locations, based on information emailed to them from offices all over the world. Some of these things were possible before the widespread use of the Internet, but the cost of private leased lines would have made many of them infeasible in practice. An office worker away from their desk, perhaps on the other side of the world on a business trip or a holiday, can access their emails, access their data using cloud computing, or open a remote desktop session into their office PC using a secure virtual private network (VPN) connection on the Internet. This can give the worker complete access to all of their normal files and data, including email and other applications, while away from the office. It has been referred to among system administrators as the Virtual Private Nightmare,[115] because it extends the secure perimeter of a corporate network into remote locations and its employees' homes.
By late 2010s Internet has been described as "the main source of scientific information "for the majority of the global North population".[116]: 111 

Social networking and entertainment
See also: Social networking service § Social impact
Many people use the World Wide Web to access news, weather and sports reports, to plan and book vacations and to pursue their personal interests. People use chat, messaging and email to make and stay in touch with friends worldwide, sometimes in the same way as some previously had pen pals. Social networking services such as Facebook have created new ways to socialize and interact. Users of these sites are able to add a wide variety of information to pages, pursue common interests, and connect with others. It is also possible to find existing acquaintances, to allow communication among existing groups of people. Sites like LinkedIn foster commercial and business connections. YouTube and Flickr specialize in users' videos and photographs. Social networking services are also widely used by businesses and other organizations to promote their brands, to market to their customers and to encourage posts to "go viral". "Black hat" social media techniques are also employed by some organizations, such as spam accounts and astroturfing.
A risk for both individuals and organizations writing posts (especially public posts) on social networking services, is that especially foolish or controversial posts occasionally lead to an unexpected and possibly large-scale backlash on social media from other Internet users. This is also a risk in relation to controversial offline behavior, if it is widely made known. The nature of this backlash can range widely from counter-arguments and public mockery, through insults and hate speech, to, in extreme cases, rape and death threats. The online disinhibition effect describes the tendency of many individuals to behave more stridently or offensively online than they would in person. A significant number of feminist women have been the target of various forms of harassment in response to posts they have made on social media, and Twitter in particular has been criticised in the past for not doing enough to aid victims of online abuse.[117]
For organizations, such a backlash can cause overall brand damage, especially if reported by the media. However, this is not always the case, as any brand damage in the eyes of people with an opposing opinion to that presented by the organization could sometimes be outweighed by strengthening the brand in the eyes of others. Furthermore, if an organization or individual gives in to demands that others perceive as wrong-headed, that can then provoke a counter-backlash.
Some websites, such as Reddit, have rules forbidding the posting of personal information of individuals (also known as doxxing), due to concerns about such postings leading to mobs of large numbers of Internet users directing harassment at the specific individuals thereby identified. In particular, the Reddit rule forbidding the posting of personal information is widely understood to imply that all identifying photos and names must be censored in Facebook screenshots posted to Reddit. However, the interpretation of this rule in relation to public Twitter posts is less clear, and in any case, like-minded people online have many other ways they can use to direct each other's attention to public social media posts they disagree with.
Children also face dangers online such as cyberbullying and approaches by sexual predators, who sometimes pose as children themselves. Children may also encounter material that they may find upsetting, or material that their parents consider to be not age-appropriate. Due to naivety, they may also post personal information about themselves online, which could put them or their families at risk unless warned not to do so. Many parents choose to enable Internet filtering or supervise their children's online activities in an attempt to protect their children from inappropriate material on the Internet. The most popular social networking services, such as Facebook and Twitter, commonly forbid users under the age of 13. However, these policies are typically trivial to circumvent by registering an account with a false birth date, and a significant number of children aged under 13 join such sites anyway. Social networking services for younger children, which claim to provide better levels of protection for children, also exist.[118]
The Internet has been a major outlet for leisure activity since its inception, with entertaining social experiments such as MUDs and MOOs being conducted on university servers, and humor-related Usenet groups receiving much traffic.[119] Many Internet forums have sections devoted to games and funny videos.[119] The Internet pornography and online gambling industries have taken advantage of the World Wide Web. Although many governments have attempted to restrict both industries' use of the Internet, in general, this has failed to stop their widespread popularity.[120]
Another area of leisure activity on the Internet is multiplayer gaming.[121] This form of recreation creates communities, where people of all ages and origins enjoy the fast-paced world of multiplayer games. These range from MMORPG to first-person shooters, from role-playing video games to online gambling. While online gaming has been around since the 1970s, modern modes of online gaming began with subscription services such as GameSpy and MPlayer.[122] Non-subscribers were limited to certain types of game play or certain games. Many people use the Internet to access and download music, movies and other works for their enjoyment and relaxation. Free and fee-based services exist for all of these activities, using centralized servers and distributed peer-to-peer technologies. Some of these sources exercise more care with respect to the original artists' copyrights than others.
Internet usage has been correlated to users' loneliness.[123] Lonely people tend to use the Internet as an outlet for their feelings and to share their stories with others, such as in the "I am lonely will anyone speak to me" thread.
A 2017 book claimed that the Internet consolidates most aspects of human endeavor into singular arenas of which all of humanity are potential members and competitors, with fundamentally negative impacts on mental health as a result. While successes in each field of activity are pervasively visible and trumpeted, they are reserved for an extremely thin sliver of the world's most exceptional, leaving everyone else behind. Whereas, before the Internet, expectations of success in any field were supported by reasonable probabilities of achievement at the village, suburb, city or even state level, the same expectations in the Internet world are virtually certain to bring disappointment today: there is always someone else, somewhere on the planet, who can do better and take the now one-and-only top spot.[124]
Cybersectarianism is a new organizational form that involves, "highly dispersed small groups of practitioners that may remain largely anonymous within the larger social context and operate in relative secrecy, while still linked remotely to a larger network of believers who share a set of practices and texts, and often a common devotion to a particular leader. Overseas supporters provide funding and support; domestic practitioners distribute tracts, participate in acts of resistance, and share information on the internal situation with outsiders. Collectively, members and practitioners of such sects construct viable virtual communities of faith, exchanging personal testimonies and engaging in the collective study via email, online chat rooms, and web-based message boards."[125] In particular, the British government has raised concerns about the prospect of young British Muslims being indoctrinated into Islamic extremism by material on the Internet, being persuaded to join terrorist groups such as the so-called "Islamic State", and then potentially committing acts of terrorism on returning to Britain after fighting in Syria or Iraq.
Cyberslacking can become a drain on corporate resources; the average UK employee spent 57 minutes a day surfing the Web while at work, according to a 2003 study by Peninsula Business Services.[126] Internet addiction disorder is excessive computer use that interferes with daily life. Nicholas G. Carr believes that Internet use has other effects on individuals, for instance improving skills of scan-reading and interfering with the deep thinking that leads to true creativity.[127]

Electronic business
Electronic business (e-business) encompasses business processes spanning the entire value chain: purchasing, supply chain management, marketing, sales, customer service, and business relationship. E-commerce seeks to add revenue streams using the Internet to build and enhance relationships with clients and partners. According to International Data Corporation, the size of worldwide e-commerce, when global business-to-business and -consumer transactions are combined, equate to $16 trillion for 2013. A report by Oxford Economics added those two together to estimate the total size of the digital economy at $20.4 trillion, equivalent to roughly 13.8% of global sales.[128]
While much has been written of the economic advantages of Internet-enabled commerce, there is also evidence that some aspects of the Internet such as maps and location-aware services may serve to reinforce economic inequality and the digital divide.[129] Electronic commerce may be responsible for consolidation and the decline of mom-and-pop, brick and mortar businesses resulting in increases in income inequality.[130][131][132]
Author Andrew Keen, a long-time critic of the social transformations caused by the Internet, has focused on the economic effects of consolidation from Internet businesses. Keen cites a 2013 Institute for Local Self-Reliance report saying brick-and-mortar retailers employ 47 people for every $10 million in sales while Amazon employs only 14. Similarly, the 700-employee room rental start-up Airbnb was valued at $10 billion in 2014, about half as much as Hilton Worldwide, which employs 152,000 people. At that time, Uber employed 1,000 full-time employees and was valued at $18.2 billion, about the same valuation as Avis Rent a Car and The Hertz Corporation combined, which together employed almost 60,000 people.[133]

Remote work
Remote work is facilitated by tools such as groupware, virtual private networks, conference calling, videotelephony, and VoIP so that work may be performed from any location, most conveniently the worker's home. It can be efficient and useful for companies as it allows workers to communicate over long distances, saving significant amounts of travel time and cost. More workers have adequate bandwidth at home to use these tools to link their home to their corporate intranet and internal communication networks.

Collaborative publishing
Wikis have also been used in the academic community for sharing and dissemination of information across institutional and international boundaries.[134] In those settings, they have been found useful for collaboration on grant writing, strategic planning, departmental documentation, and committee work.[135] The United States Patent and Trademark Office uses a wiki to allow the public to collaborate on finding prior art relevant to examination of pending patent applications. Queens, New York has used a wiki to allow citizens to collaborate on the design and planning of a local park.[136] The English Wikipedia has the largest user base among wikis on the World Wide Web[137] and ranks in the top 10 among all Web sites in terms of traffic.[138]

Politics and political revolutions
This section needs expansion with: E-government. You can help by adding to it.  (July 2021)See also: Internet censorship, Mass surveillance, and Social media use in politics
 Banner in Bangkok during the 2014 Thai coup d'état, informing the Thai public that 'like' or 'share' activities on social media could result in imprisonment (observed 30 June 2014)
The Internet has achieved new relevance as a political tool. The presidential campaign of Howard Dean in 2004 in the United States was notable for its success in soliciting donation via the Internet. Many political groups use the Internet to achieve a new method of organizing for carrying out their mission, having given rise to Internet activism, most notably practiced by rebels in the Arab Spring.[139][140] The New York Times suggested that social media websites, such as Facebook and Twitter, helped people organize the political revolutions in Egypt, by helping activists organize protests, communicate grievances, and disseminate information.[141]
Many have understood the Internet as an extension of the Habermasian notion of the public sphere, observing how network communication technologies provide something like a global civic forum. However, incidents of politically motivated Internet censorship have now been recorded in many countries, including western democracies.[142][143]

Philanthropy
The spread of low-cost Internet access in developing countries has opened up new possibilities for peer-to-peer charities, which allow individuals to contribute small amounts to charitable projects for other individuals. Websites, such as DonorsChoose and GlobalGiving, allow small-scale donors to direct funds to individual projects of their choice. A popular twist on Internet-based philanthropy is the use of peer-to-peer lending for charitable purposes. Kiva pioneered this concept in 2005, offering the first web-based service to publish individual loan profiles for funding. Kiva raises funds for local intermediary microfinance organizations that post stories and updates on behalf of the borrowers. Lenders can contribute as little as $25 to loans of their choice, and receive their money back as borrowers repay. Kiva falls short of being a pure peer-to-peer charity, in that loans are disbursed before being funded by lenders and borrowers do not communicate with lenders themselves.[144][145]

Security
Main article: Internet security
Internet resources, hardware, and software components are the target of criminal or malicious attempts to gain unauthorized control to cause interruptions, commit fraud, engage in blackmail or access private information.

Malware
Malware is malicious software used and distributed via the Internet. It includes computer viruses which are copied with the help of humans, computer worms which copy themselves automatically, software for denial of service attacks, ransomware, botnets, and spyware that reports on the activity and typing of users. Usually, these activities constitute cybercrime. Defense theorists have also speculated about the possibilities of hackers using cyber warfare using similar methods on a large scale.[146]

Surveillance
Main article: Computer and network surveillance
See also: Signals intelligence and Mass surveillance
The vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of data and traffic on the Internet.[147] In the United States for example, under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all phone calls and broadband Internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc.) are required to be available for unimpeded real-time monitoring by Federal law enforcement agencies.[148][149][150] Packet capture is the monitoring of data traffic on a computer network. Computers communicate over the Internet by breaking up messages (emails, images, videos, web pages, files, etc.) into small chunks called "packets", which are routed through a network of computers, until they reach their destination, where they are assembled back into a complete "message" again. Packet Capture Appliance intercepts these packets as they are traveling through the network, in order to examine their contents using other programs. A packet capture is an information gathering tool, but not an analysis tool. That is it gathers "messages" but it does not analyze them and figure out what they mean. Other programs are needed to perform traffic analysis and sift through intercepted data looking for important/useful information. Under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act all U.S. telecommunications providers are required to install packet sniffing technology to allow Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies to intercept all of their customers' broadband Internet and VoIP traffic.[151]
The large amount of data gathered from packet capturing requires surveillance software that filters and reports relevant information, such as the use of certain words or phrases, the access of certain types of web sites, or communicating via email or chat with certain parties.[152] Agencies, such as the Information Awareness Office, NSA, GCHQ and the FBI, spend billions of dollars per year to develop, purchase, implement, and operate systems for interception and analysis of data.[153] Similar systems are operated by Iranian secret police to identify and suppress dissidents. The required hardware and software was allegedly installed by German Siemens AG and Finnish Nokia.[154]

Censorship
Main articles: Internet censorship and Internet freedom
See also: Culture of fear and Great Firewall
 Internet censorship and surveillance by country (2018)[155][156][157][158][159]        Pervasive   Substantial     Selective   Little or none    Unclassified / No data 
Some governments, such as those of Burma, Iran, North Korea, Mainland China, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, restrict access to content on the Internet within their territories, especially to political and religious content, with domain name and keyword filters.[160]
In Norway, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden, major Internet service providers have voluntarily agreed to restrict access to sites listed by authorities. While this list of forbidden resources is supposed to contain only known child pornography sites, the content of the list is secret.[161] Many countries, including the United States, have enacted laws against the possession or distribution of certain material, such as child pornography, via the Internet, but do not mandate filter software. Many free or commercially available software programs, called content-control software are available to users to block offensive websites on individual computers or networks, in order to limit access by children to pornographic material or depiction of violence.

Performance
As the Internet is a heterogeneous network, the physical characteristics, including for example the data transfer rates of connections, vary widely. It exhibits emergent phenomena that depend on its large-scale organization.[162]

Traffic volume

Graphs are temporarily unavailable due to technical issues.Global Internet Traffic as of 2018
The volume of Internet traffic is difficult to measure because no single point of measurement exists in the multi-tiered, non-hierarchical topology. Traffic data may be estimated from the aggregate volume through the peering points of the Tier 1 network providers, but traffic that stays local in large provider networks may not be accounted for.

Outages
An Internet blackout or outage can be caused by local signaling interruptions. Disruptions of submarine communications cables may cause blackouts or slowdowns to large areas, such as in the 2008 submarine cable disruption. Less-developed countries are more vulnerable due to a small number of high-capacity links. Land cables are also vulnerable, as in 2011 when a woman digging for scrap metal severed most connectivity for the nation of Armenia.[163] Internet blackouts affecting almost entire countries can be achieved by governments as a form of Internet censorship, as in the blockage of the Internet in Egypt, whereby approximately 93%[164] of networks were without access in 2011 in an attempt to stop mobilization for anti-government protests.[165]

Energy use
Estimates of the Internet's electricity usage have been the subject of controversy, according to a 2014 peer-reviewed research paper that found claims differing by a factor of 20,000 published in the literature during the preceding decade, ranging from 0.0064 kilowatt hours per gigabyte transferred (kWh/GB) to 136 kWh/GB.[166] The researchers attributed these discrepancies mainly to the year of reference (i.e. whether efficiency gains over time had been taken into account) and to whether "end devices such as personal computers and servers are included" in the analysis.[166]
In 2011, academic researchers estimated the overall energy used by the Internet to be between 170 and 307 GW, less than two percent of the energy used by humanity. This estimate included the energy needed to build, operate, and periodically replace the estimated 750 million laptops, a billion smart phones and 100 million servers worldwide as well as the energy that routers, cell towers, optical switches, Wi-Fi transmitters and cloud storage devices use when transmitting Internet traffic.[167][168] According to a non-peer reviewed study published in 2018 by The Shift Project (a French think tank funded by corporate sponsors), nearly 4% of global CO2 emissions could be attributed to global data transfer and the necessary infrastructure.[169] The study also said that online video streaming alone accounted for 60% of this data transfer and therefore contributed to over 300 million tons of CO2 emission per year, and argued for new "digital sobriety" regulations restricting the use and size of video files.[170]


See also

Internet portalWorld portal

Crowdfunding
Crowdsourcing
Darknet
Deep web
Freenet
Internet industry jargon
Index of Internet-related articles
Internet metaphors
Internet video
"Internets"
Open Systems Interconnection
Outline of the Internet

Notes


^ See Capitalization of Internet.

^ Despite the name, TCP/IP also includes UDP traffic, which is significant.[1]


References


^ Amogh Dhamdhere. "Internet Traffic Characterization". Retrieved 6 May 2022.

^ Jump up to: a b "A Flaw in the Design". The Washington Post. 30 May 2015. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2020. The Internet was born of a big idea: Messages could be chopped into chunks, sent through a network in a series of transmissions, then reassembled by destination computers quickly and efficiently. Historians credit seminal insights to Welsh scientist Donald W. Davies and American engineer Paul Baran. ... The most important institutional force ... was the Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) ... as ARPA began work on a groundbreaking computer network, the agency recruited scientists affiliated with the nation's top universities.

^ Stewart, Bill (January 2000). "Internet History – One Page Summary". The Living Internet. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014.

^ "#3 1982: the ARPANET community grows" in 40 maps that explain the internet Archived 6 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Timothy B. Lee, Vox Conversations, 2 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

^ Strickland, Jonathan (3 March 2008). "How Stuff Works: Who owns the Internet?". Archived from the original on 19 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

^ Hoffman, P.; Harris, S. (September 2006). The Tao of IETF: A Novice's Guide to Internet Engineering Task Force. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC4677. RFC 4677.

^ "New Seven Wonders panel". USA Today. 27 October 2006. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010.

^ "Internetted". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) nineteenth-century use as an adjective.

^ "United States Army Field Manual FM 24-6 Radio Operator's Manual Army Ground Forces June 1945". United States War Department.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ Jump up to: a b Cerf, Vint; Dalal, Yogen; Sunshine, Carl (December 1974). Specification of Internet Transmission Control Protocol. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0675. RFC 675.

^ Jump up to: a b c d Corbett, Philip B. (1 June 2016). "It's Official: The 'Internet' Is Over". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.

^ Jump up to: a b Herring, Susan C. (19 October 2015). "Should You Be Capitalizing the Word 'Internet'?". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.

^ Coren, Michael J. (2 June 2016). "One of the internet's inventors thinks it should still be capitalized". Quartz. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020.

^ "World Wide Web Timeline". Pews Research Center. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2015.

^ "HTML 4.01 Specification". World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008. [T]he link (or hyperlink, or Web link) [is] the basic hypertext construct. A link is a connection from one Web resource to another. Although a simple concept, the link has been one of the primary forces driving the success of the Web.

^ Hauben, Michael; Hauben, Ronda (1997). "5 The Vision of Interactive Computing And the Future". Netizens: On the History and Impact of Usenet and the Internet (PDF). Wiley. ISBN 978-0-8186-7706-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2020.

^ Zelnick, Bob; Zelnick, Eva (1 September 2013). The Illusion of Net Neutrality: Political Alarmism, Regulatory Creep and the Real Threat to Internet Freedom. Hoover Press. ISBN 978-0-8179-1596-4. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2020.

^ Peter, Ian (2004). "So, who really did invent the Internet?". The Internet History Project. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

^ "Inductee Details - Paul Baran". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017; "Inductee Details - Donald Watts Davies". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.

^ Kim, Byung-Keun (2005). Internationalising the Internet the Co-evolution of Influence and Technology. Edward Elgar. pp. 51–55. ISBN 978-1-84542-675-0.

^ Gromov, Gregory (1995). "Roads and Crossroads of Internet History". Archived from the original on 27 January 2016.

^ Hafner, Katie (1998). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83267-8.

^ Hauben, Ronda (2001). "From the ARPANET to the Internet". Archived from the original on 21 July 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009.

^ "Internet Pioneers Discuss the Future of Money, Books, and Paper in 1972". Paleofuture. 23 July 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020.

^ Townsend, Anthony (2001). "The Internet and the Rise of the New Network Cities, 1969–1999". Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design. 28 (1): 39–58. doi:10.1068/b2688. ISSN 0265-8135. S2CID 11574572.

^ "NORSAR and the Internet". NORSAR. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013.

^ Kirstein, P.T. (1999). "Early experiences with the Arpanet and Internet in the United Kingdom" (PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 21 (1): 38–44. doi:10.1109/85.759368. ISSN 1934-1547. S2CID 1558618. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2020.

^ Leiner, Barry M. "Brief History of the Internet: The Initial Internetting Concepts". Internet Society. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

^ Cerf, V.; Kahn, R. (1974). "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication" (PDF). IEEE Transactions on Communications. 22 (5): 637–648. doi:10.1109/TCOM.1974.1092259. ISSN 1558-0857. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 September 2006. The authors wish to thank a number of colleagues for helpful comments during early discussions of international network protocols, especially R. Metcalfe, R. Scantlebury, D. Walden, and H. Zimmerman; D. Davies and L. Pouzin who constructively commented on the fragmentation and accounting issues; and S. Crocker who commented on the creation and destruction of associations.

^ "The internet's fifth man". The Economist. 30 November 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 19 April 2020. Retrieved 22 April 2020. In the early 1970s Mr Pouzin created an innovative data network that linked locations in France, Italy and Britain. Its simplicity and efficiency pointed the way to a network that could connect not just dozens of machines, but millions of them. It captured the imagination of Dr Cerf and Dr Kahn, who included aspects of its design in the protocols that now power the internet.

^ Schatt, Stan (1991). Linking LANs: A Micro Manager's Guide. McGraw-Hill. p. 200. ISBN 0-8306-3755-9.

^ Frazer, Karen D. (1995). "NSFNET: A Partnership for High-Speed Networking, Final Report 1987–1995" (PDF). Merit Network, Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2015.

^ Ben Segal (1995). "A Short History of Internet Protocols at CERN". Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2011.

^ Réseaux IP Européens (RIPE)

^ "Internet History in Asia". 16th APAN Meetings/Advanced Network Conference in Busan. Archived from the original on 1 February 2006. Retrieved 25 December 2005.

^ "The History of NORDUnet" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

^ Clarke, Roger. "Origins and Nature of the Internet in Australia". Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 21 January 2014.

^ Zakon, Robert (November 1997). RFC 2235. IETF. p. 8. doi:10.17487/RFC2235. Retrieved 2 December 2020.

^ "InfoWorld". 25 September 1989. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017 – via Google Books.

^ "INTERNET MONTHLY REPORTS". February 1990. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 28 November 2020.

^ Berners-Lee, Tim. "The Original HTTP as defined in 1991". W3C.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 1997.

^ "The website of the world's first-ever web server". info.cern.ch. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010.

^ "Stanford Federal Credit Union Pioneers Online Financial Services" (Press release). 21 June 1995. Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.

^ "History - About us - OP Group". Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.

^ Harris, Susan R.; Gerich, Elise (April 1996). "Retiring the NSFNET Backbone Service: Chronicling the End of an Era". ConneXions. 10 (4). Archived from the original on 17 August 2013.

^ "Measuring digital development: Facts and figures 2021". Telecommunication Development Bureau, International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 16 November 2022.

^ "Total Midyear Population for the World: 1950-2050"". International Programs Center for Demographic and Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2020.

^ Jindal, R. P. (2009). "From millibits to terabits per second and beyond - Over 60 years of innovation". 2009 2nd International Workshop on Electron Devices and Semiconductor Technology: 1–6. doi:10.1109/EDST.2009.5166093. ISBN 978-1-4244-3831-0. S2CID 25112828. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019.

^ Ward, Mark (3 August 2006). "How the web went world wide". Technology Correspondent. BBC News. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 24 January 2011.

^ "Brazil, Russia, India and China to Lead Internet Growth Through 2011". Clickz.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2008. Retrieved 28 May 2009.

^ Coffman, K.G; Odlyzko, A.M. (2 October 1998). "The size and growth rate of the Internet" (PDF). AT&T Labs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 21 May 2007.

^ Comer, Douglas (2006). The Internet book. Prentice Hall. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-13-233553-9.

^ "World Internet Users and Population Stats". Internet World Stats. Miniwatts Marketing Group. 22 June 2011. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2011.

^ Hilbert, Martin; López, Priscila (April 2011). "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information". Science. 332 (6025): 60–65. Bibcode:2011Sci...332...60H. doi:10.1126/science.1200970. PMID 21310967. S2CID 206531385. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2011.

^ Klein, Hans (2004). "ICANN and Non-Territorial Sovereignty: Government Without the Nation State". Internet and Public Policy Project. Georgia Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013.

^ Packard, Ashley (2010). Digital Media Law. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-4051-8169-3.

^ McCarthy, Kieren (1 July 2005). "Bush administration annexes internet". The Register. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011.

^ Mueller, Milton L. (2010). Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance. MIT Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-262-01459-5.

^ "ICG Applauds Transfer of IANA Stewardship". IANA Stewardship Transition Coordination Group (ICG). Archived from the original on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2017.

^ "Internet Society (ISOC) All About The Internet: History of the Internet". ISOC. Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2013.

^ Pasternak, Sean B. (7 March 2006). "Toronto Hydro to Install Wireless Network in Downtown Toronto". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 10 April 2006. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

^ "Mobile and Tablet Internet Usage Exceeds Desktop for First Time Worldwide". StatCounter: Global Stats, Press Release. 1 November 2016. Archived from the original on 1 November 2016. StatCounter Global Stats finds that mobile and tablet devices accounted for 51.3% of Internet usage worldwide in October compared to 48.7% by desktop.

^ "World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2020 (24th Edition/July 2020)". International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2017a. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates). World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators database

^ Jump up to: a b World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018 (PDF). UNESCO. 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018.

^ Jump up to: a b "GSMA The Mobile Economy 2019 - The Mobile Economy". 11 March 2019. Archived from the original on 11 March 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.

^ Galpaya, Helani (12 April 2019). "Zero-rating in Emerging Economies" (PDF). Global Commission on Internet Governance. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.

^ "Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI). 2015. Models of Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries. Research brief. The Impacts of Emerging Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries".[dead link]

^ Alison GillwAld, ChenAi ChAir, Ariel Futter, KweKu KorAntenG, FolA oduFuwA, John wAlubenGo (12 September 2016). "Much Ado About Nothing? Zero Rating in the African Context" (PDF). Researchictafrica. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Jump up to: a b J. Postel, ed. (September 1981). Internet Protocol, DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0791. RFC 791. Updated by RFC 1349, 2474, 6864

^ Huston, Geoff. "IPv4 Address Report, daily generated". Archived from the original on 1 April 2009. Retrieved 20 May 2009.

^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1995). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC1883. RFC 1883.

^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1998). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC2460. RFC 2460.

^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (July 2017). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC8200. RFC 8200.

^ "Notice of Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) Address Depletion" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 7 August 2009.

^ Jeffrey Mogul; Jon Postel (August 1985). Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0950. RFC 950. Updated by RFC 6918.

^ Fisher, Tim. "How to Find Your Default Gateway IP Address". Lifewire. Archived from the original on 25 February 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019.

^ "Default Gateway". techopedia.com. 30 June 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020.

^ "IETF Home Page". Ietf.org. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009.

^ "The Difference Between the Internet and the World Wide Web". Webopedia.com. QuinStreet Inc. 24 June 2010. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014.

^ "IAB Internet advertising revenue report: 2012 full year results" (PDF). PricewaterhouseCoopers, Internet Advertising Bureau. April 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2013.

^ Brown, Ron (26 October 1972). "Fax invades the mail market". New Scientist. 56 (817): 218–221.

^ Luckett, Herbert P. (March 1973). "What's News: Electronic-mail delivery gets started". Popular Science. 202 (3): 85.

^ Booth, C (2010). "Chapter 2: IP Phones, Software VoIP, and Integrated and Mobile VoIP". Library Technology Reports. 46 (5): 11–19.

^ Morrison, Geoff (18 November 2010). "What to know before buying a 'connected' TV – Technology & science – Tech and gadgets – Tech Holiday Guide". NBC News. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

^ "Press - YouTube". www.youtube.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2020.

^ "YouTube now defaults to HTML5". YouTube Engineering and Developers Blog. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018.

^ Carlson, Kathie; Flanagin, Michael N.; Martin, Kathleen; Martin, Mary E.; Mendelsohn, John; Rodgers, Priscilla Young; Ronnberg, Ami; Salman, Sherry; Wesley, Deborah A.;  et al. (Authors) (2010).  Arm, Karen; Ueda, Kako; Thulin, Anne; Langerak, Allison; Kiley, Timothy Gus; Wolff, Mary (eds.). The Book of Symbols: Reflections on Archetypal Images. Köln: Taschen. p. 518. ISBN 978-3-8365-1448-4.

^ Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (2 October 2017). "Technology Adoption". Our World in Data. Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019.

^ "Individuals using the Internet 2005 to 2014" Archived 28 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.

^ "Internet users per 100 inhabitants 1997 to 2007" Archived 17 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, ICT Data and Statistics (IDS), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.

^ Internet users graphs Archived 9 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Market Information and Statistics, International Telecommunication Union

^ "Google Earth demonstrates how technology benefits RI's civil society, govt". Antara News. 26 May 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012. Retrieved 19 November 2012.

^ Steve Dent. "There are now 3 billion Internet users, mostly in rich countries". Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014.

^ "Statistical Report on Internet Development in China" (PDF). Cnnic.com. January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019.

^ "World Internet Users Statistics and 2019 World Population Stats". internetworldstats.com. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2019.

^ "Digital 2020: 3.8 billion people use social media". 30 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2020.

^ "Internet". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 19 March 2021.

^ Jump up to: a b "Number of Internet Users by Language". Internet World Stats, Miniwatts Marketing Group. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2012.

^ "World Internet Usage Statistics News and Population Stats". 30 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 March 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2011.

^ How men and women use the Internet Pew Research Center 28 December 2005

^ "Rapleaf Study on Social Network Users". Archived from the original on 20 March 2009.

^ "Women Ahead of Men in Online Tv, Dvr, Games, And Social Media". Entrepreneur.com. 1 May 2008. Archived from the original on 16 September 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

^ "Technorati's State of the Blogosphere". Technorati. Archived from the original on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

^ Jump up to: a b "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000–2012" Archived 9 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine, International Telecommunication Union (Geneva), June 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2013.

^ Seese, Michael (2009). Scrappy Information Security. p. 130. ISBN 978-1-60005-132-6. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2015.

^ netizen Archived 21 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Dictionary.com

^ Hauben, Michael. "The Net and Netizens". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.

^ "A Brief History of the Internet". the Internet Society. Archived from the original on 4 June 2007.

^ "Oxford Dictionaries – internaut". oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2015.

^ Mossberger, Karen; Tolbert, Caroline J.; McNeal, Ramona S. (23 November 2011). Digital Citizenship – The Internet, Society and Participation. ISBN 978-0-8194-5606-9.

^ "Usage of content languages for websites". W3Techs.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2013.

^ "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.

^ "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.

^ Reips, U.-D. (2008). "How Internet-mediated research changes science". Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 268–294. ISBN 9780521694643. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014.

^ "The Virtual Private Nightmare: VPN". Librenix. 4 August 2004. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2010.

^ Dariusz Jemielniak; Aleksandra Przegalinska (18 February 2020). Collaborative Society. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-35645-9. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.

^ Moore, Keith (27 July 2013). "Twitter 'report abuse' button calls after rape threats". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.

^ Kessler, Sarah (11 October 2010). "5 Fun and Safe Social Networks for Children". Mashable. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.

^ Jump up to: a b "Communication in our life". StudFiles (in Russian). Retrieved 16 May 2023.

^ Goldman, Russell (22 January 2008). "Do It Yourself! Amateur Porn Stars Make Bank". ABC News. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011.

^ Spohn, Dave (15 December 2009). "Top Online Game Trends of the Decade". About.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011.

^ Spohn, Dave (2 June 2011). "Internet Game Timeline: 1963 – 2004". About.com. Archived from the original on 25 April 2006.

^ Carole Hughes; Boston College. "The Relationship Between Internet Use and Loneliness Among College Students". Boston College. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2011.

^ Barker, Eric (2017). Barking Up the Wrong Tree. HarperCollins. pp. 235–6. ISBN 9780062416049.

^ Thornton, Patricia M. (2003). "The New Cybersects: Resistance and Repression in the Reform era".  In Perry, Elizabeth; Selden, Mark (eds.). Chinese Society: Change, Conflict and Resistance (2 ed.). London and New York: Routledge. pp. 149–150. ISBN 9780415560740.

^ "Net abuse hits small city firms". The Scotsman. Edinburgh. 11 September 2003. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2009.

^ Carr, Nicholas G. (7 June 2010). The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. W.W. Norton. p. 276. ISBN 978-0393072228.

^ "The New Digital Economy: How it will transform business" (PDF). Oxford Economics. 2 July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2014.

^ Badger, Emily (6 February 2013). "How the Internet Reinforces Inequality in the Real World". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2013.

^ "E-commerce will make the shopping mall a retail wasteland". ZDNet. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013.

^ "'Free Shipping Day' Promotion Spurs Late-Season Online Spending Surge, Improving Season-to-Date Growth Rate to 16 Percent vs. Year Ago". Comscore. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013.

^ "The Death of the American Shopping Mall". The Atlantic – Cities. 26 December 2012. Archived from the original on 15 February 2013.

^ Harris, Michael (2 January 2015). "Book review: 'The Internet Is Not the Answer' by Andrew Keen". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 20 January 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2015.

^ MM Wanderley; D Birnbaum; J Malloch (2006). New Interfaces For Musical Expression. IRCAM – Centre Pompidou. p. 180. ISBN 978-2-84426-314-8.

^ Nancy T. Lombardo (June 2008). "Putting Wikis to Work in Libraries". Medical Reference Services Quarterly. 27 (2): 129–145. doi:10.1080/02763860802114223. PMID 18844087. S2CID 11552140.

^ Noveck, Beth Simone (March 2007). "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". Journal of Legal Education. 57 (1). Archived from the original on 3 July 2014.(subscription required)

^ "WikiStats by S23". S23Wiki. 3 April 2008. Archived from the original on 25 August 2014. Retrieved 7 April 2007.

^ "Alexa Web Search – Top 500". Alexa Internet. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015.

^ "The Arab Uprising's Cascading Effects". Miller-mccune.com. 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 February 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011.

^ "The Role of the Internet in Democratic Transition: Case Study of the Arab Spring" (PDF). 5 July 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2012., Davit Chokoshvili, Master's Thesis, June 2011

^ Kirkpatrick, David D. (9 February 2011). "Wired and Shrewd, Young Egyptians Guide Revolt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.

^ Ronald Deibert; John Palfrey; Rafal Rohozinski; Jonathan Zittrain (25 January 2008). Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-29072-2.

^ Larry Diamond; Marc F. Plattner (30 July 2012). Liberation Technology: Social Media and the Struggle for Democracy. JHU Press. ISBN 978-1-4214-0568-1.

^ Roodman, David (2 October 2009). "Kiva Is Not Quite What It Seems". Center for Global Development. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010. Retrieved 16 January 2010.

^ Strom, Stephanie (9 November 2009). "Confusion on Where Money Lent via Kiva Goes". The New York Times. p. 6. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.

^ Andriole, Steve. "Cyberwarfare Will Explode In 2020 (Because It's Cheap, Easy And Effective)". Forbes. Retrieved 18 May 2021.

^ Diffie, Whitfield; Susan Landau (August 2008). "Internet Eavesdropping: A Brave New World of Wiretapping". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 13 November 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2009.

^ "CALEA Archive". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 25 October 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2009.

^ "CALEA: The Perils of Wiretapping the Internet". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 16 March 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.

^ "CALEA: Frequently Asked Questions". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 1 May 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.

^ "American Council on Education vs. FCC, Decision, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" (PDF). 9 June 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2013.

^ Hill, Michael (11 October 2004). "Government funds chat room surveillance research". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 11 May 2010. Retrieved 19 March 2009.

^ McCullagh, Declan (30 January 2007). "FBI turns to broad new wiretap method". ZDNet News. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 13 March 2009.

^ "First round in Internet war goes to Iranian intelligence". Debkafile. 28 June 2009. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013.

^ "Freedom on the Net 2018" (PDF). Freedom House. November 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018.

^ OpenNet Initiative "Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet" Archived 10 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 8 November 2011 and "Country Profiles" Archived 26 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, the OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative partnership of the Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto; the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University; and the SecDev Group, Ottawa

^ Due to legal concerns the OpenNet Initiative does not check for filtering of child pornography and because their classifications focus on technical filtering, they do not include other types of censorship.

^ "Enemies of the Internet 2014: Entities at the heart of censorship and surveillance". Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014.

^ "Internet Enemies" (PDF). Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 12 March 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2017.

^ Deibert, Ronald J.; Palfrey, John G.; Rohozinski, Rafal; Zittrain, Jonathan (April 2010). Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262514354. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.

^ "Finland censors anti-censorship site". The Register. 18 February 2008. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 19 February 2008.

^ Albert, Réka; Jeong, Hawoong; Barabási, Albert-László (9 September 1999). "Diameter of the World-Wide Web". Nature. 401 (6749): 130–131. arXiv:cond-mat/9907038. Bibcode:1999Natur.401..130A. doi:10.1038/43601. S2CID 4419938.

^ "Georgian woman cuts off web access to whole of Armenia". The Guardian. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 25 August 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2012.

^ Cowie, James. "Egypt Leaves the Internet". Renesys. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2011.

^ "Egypt severs internet connection amid growing unrest". BBC News. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012.

^ Jump up to: a b Coroama, Vlad C.; Hilty, Lorenz M. (February 2014). "Assessing Internet energy intensity: A review of methods and results" (PDF). Environmental Impact Assessment Review. 45: 63–68. doi:10.1016/j.eiar.2013.12.004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020.

^ Giles, Jim (26 October 2011). "Internet responsible for 2 per cent of global energy usage". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014.,

^ Raghavan, Barath; Ma, Justin (14 November 2011). "The Energy and Emergy of the Internet" (PDF). Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks. Cambridge, MA.: ACM SIGCOMM: 1–6. doi:10.1145/2070562.2070571. ISBN 9781450310598. S2CID 6125953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2014.

^ Cwienk, Jeannette (11 July 2019). "Is Netflix bad for the environment? How streaming video contributes to climate change | DW | 11.07.2019". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.

^ ""Climate crisis: The Unsustainable Use of Online Video" : Our new report". The Shift Project. 10 July 2019. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.


Sources
 This article incorporates text from a free content work. . Text taken from World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018​, 202,  UNESCO. To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
Further reading
First Monday, a peer-reviewed journal on the Internet by the University Library of the University of Illinois at Chicago, ISSN 1396-0466
The Internet Explained, Vincent Zegna & Mike Pepper, Sonet Digital, November 2005, pp. 1–7.
Abram, Cleo (8 January 2020). "How Does the Internet Work?". YouTube. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2020.
Castells, Manuel (2010). The Rise of the Network Society. Wiley. ISBN 9781405196864.
External links


Internet  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity

The Internet Society
Living Internet, Internet history and related information, including information from many creators of the Internet
showvteMedia cultureMedia
24-hour news cycle
Alternative media
Digital media
Electronic media
Mass media
Mainstream media
New media
News broadcasting
News media
Old media
Social media
State media
Ideology
Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music
DeceptionForms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Philosophers
Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan
Jacques Rancière
Counterculture
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Review bomb
Strike action
In academia
Influence of mass media
Media studies
Mediatization
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd
Issues
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Social influence
Synonyms
Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle

showvteSemantic WebBackground
Databases
Hypertext
Internet
Ontologies
Semantics
Semantic networks
World Wide Web
Sub-topics
Dataspaces
Hyperdata
Linked data
Rule-based systems
Applications
Semantic analytics
Semantic broker
Semantic computing
Semantic mapper
Semantic matching
Semantic publishing
Semantic reasoner
Semantic search
Semantic service-oriented architecture
Semantic wiki
Solid
Related topics
Collective intelligence
Description logic
Folksonomy
Geotagging
Information architecture
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge management
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Library 2.0
Digital library
Digital humanities
Metadata
References
Topic map
Web 2.0
Web engineering
Web Science Trust
StandardsSyntax and supporting technologies
HTTP
IRI
URI
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
RRID
SPARQL
XML
Semantic HTML
Schemas, ontologies and rules
Common Logic
OWL
RDFS
Rule Interchange Format
Semantic Web Rule Language
ALPS
SHACL
Semantic annotation
eRDF
GRDDL
Microdata
Microformats
RDFa
SAWSDL
Facebook Platform
Common vocabularies
DOAP
Dublin Core
FOAF
Schema.org
SIOC
SKOS
Microformat vocabularies
hAtom
hCalendar
hCard
hProduct
hRecipe
hReview

showvteCloud computingAs a service
Content as a service
Data as a service
Desktop as a service
Function as a service
Infrastructure as a service
Integration platform as a service
Backend as a service
Network as a service
Platform as a service
Security as a service
Software as a service
Technologies
Cloud database
Cloud storage
Data centers
Distributed file system for cloud
Hardware virtualization
Internet
Native cloud application
Networking
Security
Structured storage
Virtual appliance
Web APIs
Virtual private cloud
Applications
Box
Cloud-native processor
Dropbox
Google
Workspace
Drive
HP Cloud (closed)
IBM Cloud
Microsoft
Office 365
OneDrive
Nextcloud
Oracle Cloud
Rackspace
Salesforce
Workday
Zoho
Platforms
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
AppScale
Box
Bluemix
CloudBolt
Cloud Foundry
Cloud-native processor
Cocaine (PaaS)
Creatio
Engine Yard
Helion
GE Predix
Google App Engine
GreenQloud
Heroku
IBM Cloud
Inktank
Jelastic
Microsoft Azure
MindSphere
Netlify
Oracle Cloud
OutSystems
openQRM
OpenShift
PythonAnywhere
RightScale
Scalr
Force.com
SAP Cloud Platform
Splunk
Vercel
VMware vCloud Air
WaveMaker
Infrastructure
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
Abiquo Enterprise Edition
CloudStack
Citrix Cloud
Deft
DigitalOcean
EMC Atmos
Eucalyptus
Fujitsu
Google Cloud Platform
GreenButton
GreenQloud
IBM Cloud
iland
Joyent
Linode
Lunacloud
Microsoft Azure
Mirantis
Netlify
Nimbula
Nimbus
OpenIO
OpenNebula
OpenStack
Oracle Cloud
OrionVM
Rackspace Cloud
Safe Swiss Cloud
Zadara
libvirt
libguestfs
OVirt
Virtual Machine Manager
Wakame-vdc
Vercel
Virtual Private Cloud OnDemand

 Category
 Commons

showvteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Daniel Davis Jr.
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)

 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons

showAuthority control National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Internet&oldid=1157179241"
Categories: Internet1969 establishments in the United StatesAmerican inventionsComputer-related introductions in 1969Computer-related introductions in 1989Cultural globalizationDigital technologyMass media technologyTelecommunicationsNew mediaPromotion and marketing communicationsPublic servicesTelegraphyTransport systemsVirtual realityMain topic articlesHidden categories: Pages using the Graph extensionPages with disabled graphsWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: url-statusAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2020CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listCS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Pages containing links to subscription-only contentArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from January 2021All articles needing additional referencesUse American English from August 2020All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse dmy dates from August 2020Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2011All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from December 2018All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from March 2020Articles to be expanded from July 2021All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesFree-content attributionFree content from UNESCOPages using Sister project links with default searchArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with EMU identifiersArticles with HDS identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers
Toggle the table of contents






Toggle the table of contents





Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Terminology







2History







3Governance







4Infrastructure


				Toggle Infrastructure subsection
			




4.1Service tiers







4.2Access





4.2.1Mobile communication











5Internet Protocol Suite


				Toggle Internet Protocol Suite subsection
			




5.1Internet protocol





5.1.1IP Addresses







5.1.2IPv4







5.1.3IPv6







5.1.4Subnetwork







5.1.5Routing









5.2IETF









6Applications and services


				Toggle Applications and services subsection
			




6.1World Wide Web







6.2Communication







6.3Data transfer









7Social impact


				Toggle Social impact subsection
			




7.1Users







7.2Usage







7.3Social networking and entertainment







7.4Electronic business







7.5Remote work







7.6Collaborative publishing







7.7Politics and political revolutions







7.8Philanthropy









8Security


				Toggle Security subsection
			




8.1Malware







8.2Surveillance







8.3Censorship









9Performance


				Toggle Performance subsection
			




9.1Traffic volume







9.2Outages







9.3Energy use









10See also







11Notes







12References







13Sources







14Further reading







15External links









Internet




212 languages



AcèhAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛअंगिकाÆngliscالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐArmãneashtiঅসমীয়াAsturianuअवधीAvañe'ẽAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBamanankanবাংলাBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChiShonaChiTumbukaCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEmiliàn e rumagnòlЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalego贛語ગુજરાતી客家語/Hak-kâ-ngîХальмг한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIgboIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitutИронIsiZuluÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡKapampanganქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаລາວLatgaļuLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingálaLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa Melayuꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟMinangkabau閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語NapulitanoНохчийнNordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandOccitanОлык марийଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPangasinanپنجابیPapiamentuپښتوPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPiemontèisTok PisinPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaQırımtatarcaRipoarischRomânăRumantschRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаसंस्कृतम्SängöᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSarduScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСловѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча / tatarçaతెలుగుTetunไทยThuɔŋjäŋТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩತುಳುTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWalonWest-VlamsWinarayWolof吴语XitsongaייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文203 more
Edit links
Toggle the table of contents





Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Terminology







2History







3Governance







4Infrastructure


				Toggle Infrastructure subsection
			




4.1Service tiers







4.2Access





4.2.1Mobile communication











5Internet Protocol Suite


				Toggle Internet Protocol Suite subsection
			




5.1Internet protocol





5.1.1IP Addresses







5.1.2IPv4







5.1.3IPv6







5.1.4Subnetwork







5.1.5Routing









5.2IETF









6Applications and services


				Toggle Applications and services subsection
			




6.1World Wide Web







6.2Communication







6.3Data transfer









7Social impact


				Toggle Social impact subsection
			




7.1Users







7.2Usage







7.3Social networking and entertainment







7.4Electronic business







7.5Remote work







7.6Collaborative publishing







7.7Politics and political revolutions







7.8Philanthropy









8Security


				Toggle Security subsection
			




8.1Malware







8.2Surveillance







8.3Censorship









9Performance


				Toggle Performance subsection
			




9.1Traffic volume







9.2Outages







9.3Energy use









10See also







11Notes







12References







13Sources







14Further reading







15External links
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 

(Top)


	Bullet Point 2: 


1Terminology




	Bullet Point 3: 


2History




	Bullet Point 4: 


3Governance




	Bullet Point 5: 


4Infrastructure


				Toggle Infrastructure subsection
			




4.1Service tiers







4.2Access





4.2.1Mobile communication








	Bullet Point 6: 


5Internet Protocol Suite


				Toggle Internet Protocol Suite subsection
			




5.1Internet protocol





5.1.1IP Addresses







5.1.2IPv4







5.1.3IPv6







5.1.4Subnetwork







5.1.5Routing









5.2IETF






	Bullet Point 7: 


6Applications and services


				Toggle Applications and services subsection
			




6.1World Wide Web







6.2Communication







6.3Data transfer






	Bullet Point 8: 


7Social impact


				Toggle Social impact subsection
			




7.1Users







7.2Usage







7.3Social networking and entertainment







7.4Electronic business







7.5Remote work







7.6Collaborative publishing







7.7Politics and political revolutions







7.8Philanthropy






	Bullet Point 9: 


8Security


				Toggle Security subsection
			




8.1Malware







8.2Surveillance







8.3Censorship






	Bullet Point 10: 


9Performance


				Toggle Performance subsection
			




9.1Traffic volume







9.2Outages







9.3Energy use






	Bullet Point 11: 


10See also




	Bullet Point 12: 


11Notes




	Bullet Point 13: 


12References




	Bullet Point 14: 


13Sources




	Bullet Point 15: 


14Further reading




	Bullet Point 16: 


15External links




4Infrastructure


				Toggle Infrastructure subsection
			




4.1Service tiers







4.2Access





4.2.1Mobile communication
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


4.1Service tiers




	Bullet Point 2: 


4.2Access





4.2.1Mobile communication






Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


4.2.1Mobile communication




5Internet Protocol Suite


				Toggle Internet Protocol Suite subsection
			




5.1Internet protocol





5.1.1IP Addresses







5.1.2IPv4







5.1.3IPv6







5.1.4Subnetwork







5.1.5Routing









5.2IETF
Toggle Internet Protocol Suite subsection
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


5.1Internet protocol





5.1.1IP Addresses







5.1.2IPv4







5.1.3IPv6







5.1.4Subnetwork







5.1.5Routing






	Bullet Point 2: 


5.2IETF




5.1Internet protocol





5.1.1IP Addresses







5.1.2IPv4







5.1.3IPv6







5.1.4Subnetwork







5.1.5Routing
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


5.1.1IP Addresses




	Bullet Point 2: 


5.1.2IPv4




	Bullet Point 3: 


5.1.3IPv6




	Bullet Point 4: 


5.1.4Subnetwork




	Bullet Point 5: 


5.1.5Routing




6Applications and services


				Toggle Applications and services subsection
			




6.1World Wide Web







6.2Communication







6.3Data transfer
Toggle Applications and services subsection
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


6.1World Wide Web




	Bullet Point 2: 


6.2Communication




	Bullet Point 3: 


6.3Data transfer




7Social impact


				Toggle Social impact subsection
			




7.1Users







7.2Usage







7.3Social networking and entertainment







7.4Electronic business







7.5Remote work







7.6Collaborative publishing







7.7Politics and political revolutions







7.8Philanthropy
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


7.1Users




	Bullet Point 2: 


7.2Usage




	Bullet Point 3: 


7.3Social networking and entertainment




	Bullet Point 4: 


7.4Electronic business




	Bullet Point 5: 


7.5Remote work




	Bullet Point 6: 


7.6Collaborative publishing




	Bullet Point 7: 


7.7Politics and political revolutions




	Bullet Point 8: 


7.8Philanthropy




8Security


				Toggle Security subsection
			




8.1Malware







8.2Surveillance







8.3Censorship
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


8.1Malware




	Bullet Point 2: 


8.2Surveillance




	Bullet Point 3: 


8.3Censorship




9Performance


				Toggle Performance subsection
			




9.1Traffic volume







9.2Outages







9.3Energy use
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


9.1Traffic volume




	Bullet Point 2: 


9.2Outages




	Bullet Point 3: 


9.3Energy use




Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Acèh
	Bullet Point 2: Afrikaans
	Bullet Point 3: Alemannisch
	Bullet Point 4: አማርኛ
	Bullet Point 5: अंगिका
	Bullet Point 6: Ænglisc
	Bullet Point 7: العربية
	Bullet Point 8: Aragonés
	Bullet Point 9: ܐܪܡܝܐ
	Bullet Point 10: Armãneashti
	Bullet Point 11: অসমীয়া
	Bullet Point 12: Asturianu
	Bullet Point 13: अवधी
	Bullet Point 14: Avañe'ẽ
	Bullet Point 15: Azərbaycanca
	Bullet Point 16: تۆرکجه
	Bullet Point 17: Bamanankan
	Bullet Point 18: বাংলা
	Bullet Point 19: Bân-lâm-gú
	Bullet Point 20: Basa Banyumasan
	Bullet Point 21: Башҡортса
	Bullet Point 22: Беларуская
	Bullet Point 23: Беларуская (тарашкевіца)
	Bullet Point 24: भोजपुरी
	Bullet Point 25: Bikol Central
	Bullet Point 26: Български
	Bullet Point 27: Boarisch
	Bullet Point 28: Bosanski
	Bullet Point 29: Brezhoneg
	Bullet Point 30: Буряад
	Bullet Point 31: Català
	Bullet Point 32: Чӑвашла
	Bullet Point 33: Cebuano
	Bullet Point 34: Čeština
	Bullet Point 35: ChiShona
	Bullet Point 36: ChiTumbuka
	Bullet Point 37: Cymraeg
	Bullet Point 38: Dansk
	Bullet Point 39: الدارجة
	Bullet Point 40: Deutsch
	Bullet Point 41: Eesti
	Bullet Point 42: Ελληνικά
	Bullet Point 43: Emiliàn e rumagnòl
	Bullet Point 44: Эрзянь
	Bullet Point 45: Español
	Bullet Point 46: Esperanto
	Bullet Point 47: Estremeñu
	Bullet Point 48: Euskara
	Bullet Point 49: فارسی
	Bullet Point 50: Fiji Hindi
	Bullet Point 51: Føroyskt
	Bullet Point 52: Français
	Bullet Point 53: Frysk
	Bullet Point 54: Furlan
	Bullet Point 55: Gaeilge
	Bullet Point 56: Gaelg
	Bullet Point 57: Gàidhlig
	Bullet Point 58: Galego
	Bullet Point 59: 贛語
	Bullet Point 60: ગુજરાતી
	Bullet Point 61: 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
	Bullet Point 62: Хальмг
	Bullet Point 63: 한국어
	Bullet Point 64: Hausa
	Bullet Point 65: Հայերեն
	Bullet Point 66: हिन्दी
	Bullet Point 67: Hornjoserbsce
	Bullet Point 68: Hrvatski
	Bullet Point 69: Ido
	Bullet Point 70: Igbo
	Bullet Point 71: Ilokano
	Bullet Point 72: Bahasa Indonesia
	Bullet Point 73: Interlingua
	Bullet Point 74: Interlingue
	Bullet Point 75: ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut
	Bullet Point 76: Ирон
	Bullet Point 77: IsiZulu
	Bullet Point 78: Íslenska
	Bullet Point 79: Italiano
	Bullet Point 80: עברית
	Bullet Point 81: Jawa
	Bullet Point 82: ಕನ್ನಡ
	Bullet Point 83: Kapampangan
	Bullet Point 84: ქართული
	Bullet Point 85: Kaszëbsczi
	Bullet Point 86: Қазақша
	Bullet Point 87: Kernowek
	Bullet Point 88: Kiswahili
	Bullet Point 89: Kreyòl ayisyen
	Bullet Point 90: Kriyòl gwiyannen
	Bullet Point 91: Kurdî
	Bullet Point 92: Кыргызча
	Bullet Point 93: ລາວ
	Bullet Point 94: Latgaļu
	Bullet Point 95: Latina
	Bullet Point 96: Latviešu
	Bullet Point 97: Lëtzebuergesch
	Bullet Point 98: Лезги
	Bullet Point 99: Lietuvių
	Bullet Point 100: Ligure
	Bullet Point 101: Limburgs
	Bullet Point 102: Lingála
	Bullet Point 103: Lingua Franca Nova
	Bullet Point 104: Livvinkarjala
	Bullet Point 105: Lombard
	Bullet Point 106: Magyar
	Bullet Point 107: Македонски
	Bullet Point 108: Malagasy
	Bullet Point 109: മലയാളം
	Bullet Point 110: मराठी
	Bullet Point 111: მარგალური
	Bullet Point 112: مصرى
	Bullet Point 113: مازِرونی
	Bullet Point 114: Bahasa Melayu
	Bullet Point 115: ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ
	Bullet Point 116: Minangkabau
	Bullet Point 117: 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
	Bullet Point 118: Mirandés
	Bullet Point 119: Мокшень
	Bullet Point 120: Монгол
	Bullet Point 121: မြန်မာဘာသာ
	Bullet Point 122: Nederlands
	Bullet Point 123: Nedersaksies
	Bullet Point 124: नेपाली
	Bullet Point 125: नेपाल भाषा
	Bullet Point 126: 日本語
	Bullet Point 127: Napulitano
	Bullet Point 128: Нохчийн
	Bullet Point 129: Nordfriisk
	Bullet Point 130: Norsk bokmål
	Bullet Point 131: Norsk nynorsk
	Bullet Point 132: Nouormand
	Bullet Point 133: Occitan
	Bullet Point 134: Олык марий
	Bullet Point 135: ଓଡ଼ିଆ
	Bullet Point 136: Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча
	Bullet Point 137: ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
	Bullet Point 138: Pangasinan
	Bullet Point 139: پنجابی
	Bullet Point 140: Papiamentu
	Bullet Point 141: پښتو
	Bullet Point 142: Patois
	Bullet Point 143: ភាសាខ្មែរ
	Bullet Point 144: Piemontèis
	Bullet Point 145: Tok Pisin
	Bullet Point 146: Plattdüütsch
	Bullet Point 147: Polski
	Bullet Point 148: Português
	Bullet Point 149: Qaraqalpaqsha
	Bullet Point 150: Qırımtatarca
	Bullet Point 151: Ripoarisch
	Bullet Point 152: Română
	Bullet Point 153: Rumantsch
	Bullet Point 154: Runa Simi
	Bullet Point 155: Русиньскый
	Bullet Point 156: Русский
	Bullet Point 157: Саха тыла
	Bullet Point 158: संस्कृतम्
	Bullet Point 159: Sängö
	Bullet Point 160: ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
	Bullet Point 161: Sardu
	Bullet Point 162: Scots
	Bullet Point 163: Seeltersk
	Bullet Point 164: Shqip
	Bullet Point 165: Sicilianu
	Bullet Point 166: සිංහල
	Bullet Point 167: Simple English
	Bullet Point 168: سنڌي
	Bullet Point 169: Slovenčina
	Bullet Point 170: Slovenščina
	Bullet Point 171: Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ
	Bullet Point 172: Ślůnski
	Bullet Point 173: Soomaaliga
	Bullet Point 174: کوردی
	Bullet Point 175: Српски / srpski
	Bullet Point 176: Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
	Bullet Point 177: Sunda
	Bullet Point 178: Suomi
	Bullet Point 179: Svenska
	Bullet Point 180: Tagalog
	Bullet Point 181: தமிழ்
	Bullet Point 182: Taqbaylit
	Bullet Point 183: Татарча / tatarça
	Bullet Point 184: తెలుగు
	Bullet Point 185: Tetun
	Bullet Point 186: ไทย
	Bullet Point 187: Thuɔŋjäŋ
	Bullet Point 188: Тоҷикӣ
	Bullet Point 189: ᏣᎳᎩ
	Bullet Point 190: ತುಳು
	Bullet Point 191: Türkçe
	Bullet Point 192: Українська
	Bullet Point 193: اردو
	Bullet Point 194: ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
	Bullet Point 195: Vahcuengh
	Bullet Point 196: Vèneto
	Bullet Point 197: Vepsän kel’
	Bullet Point 198: Tiếng Việt
	Bullet Point 199: Volapük
	Bullet Point 200: Võro
	Bullet Point 201: Walon
	Bullet Point 202: West-Vlams
	Bullet Point 203: Winaray
	Bullet Point 204: Wolof
	Bullet Point 205: 吴语
	Bullet Point 206: Xitsonga
	Bullet Point 207: ייִדיש
	Bullet Point 208: Yorùbá
	Bullet Point 209: 粵語
	Bullet Point 210: Zazaki
	Bullet Point 211: Žemaitėška
	Bullet Point 212: 中文
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Article

	Bullet Point 2: Talk

Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Read

	Bullet Point 2: View source

	Bullet Point 3: View history

Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadView sourceView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata itemEdit interlanguage links




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikiversity
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Read
	Bullet Point 2: View source
	Bullet Point 3: View history
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: What links here
	Bullet Point 2: Related changes
	Bullet Point 3: Upload file
	Bullet Point 4: Special pages
	Bullet Point 5: Permanent link
	Bullet Point 6: Page information
	Bullet Point 7: Cite this page
	Bullet Point 8: Wikidata item
	Bullet Point 9: Edit interlanguage links
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Download as PDF
	Bullet Point 2: Printable version
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Wikimedia Commons
	Bullet Point 2: Wikinews
	Bullet Point 3: Wikiquote
	Bullet Point 4: Wikiversity
The webpage contains an image of a Page semi-protected here.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Internet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Internet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR
Find sources: "Internet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR
(Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Learn how and when to remove this template message
InternetAn Opte Project visualization of routing paths through a portion of the Internet
hideGeneral
Access
Activism
Censorship
Data activism
Democracy
Digital divide
Digital rights
Freedom
Freedom of information
Internet phenomena
Net neutrality
Privacy
Right to Internet access
Slacktivism
Sociology
Usage
Vigilantism
Virtual community
Virtual volunteering

hideGovernance
IGF
NRO
IANA
ICANN
IETF
ISOC

hideInformation infrastructure
Domain Name System
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Internet exchange point
Internet protocol suite
Internet Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol
Internet service provider
IP address
Internet Message Access Protocol
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol

hideServices
Blogs
Microblogging
Email
Fax
File sharing
File transfer
Games
Instant messaging
Podcasts
Shopping
Television
Voice over IP
World Wide Web
search

hideHistory
History of the Internet
Oldest domain names
Pioneers
Protocol Wars

hideGuides
 Index
Outline

 Internet portalvte
An Opte Project visualization of routing paths through a portion of the Internet
The webpage contains an image of a Visualization of Internet routing paths here.
hideGeneral
Access
Activism
Censorship
Data activism
Democracy
Digital divide
Digital rights
Freedom
Freedom of information
Internet phenomena
Net neutrality
Privacy
Right to Internet access
Slacktivism
Sociology
Usage
Vigilantism
Virtual community
Virtual volunteering
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Access
	Bullet Point 2: Activism
	Bullet Point 3: Censorship
	Bullet Point 4: Data activism
	Bullet Point 5: Democracy
	Bullet Point 6: Digital divide
	Bullet Point 7: Digital rights
	Bullet Point 8: Freedom
	Bullet Point 9: Freedom of information
	Bullet Point 10: Internet phenomena
	Bullet Point 11: Net neutrality
	Bullet Point 12: Privacy
	Bullet Point 13: Right to Internet access
	Bullet Point 14: Slacktivism
	Bullet Point 15: Sociology
	Bullet Point 16: Usage
	Bullet Point 17: Vigilantism
	Bullet Point 18: Virtual community
	Bullet Point 19: Virtual volunteering
hideGovernance
IGF
NRO
IANA
ICANN
IETF
ISOC
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: IGF
	Bullet Point 2: NRO
	Bullet Point 3: IANA
	Bullet Point 4: ICANN
	Bullet Point 5: IETF
	Bullet Point 6: ISOC
hideInformation infrastructure
Domain Name System
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Internet exchange point
Internet protocol suite
Internet Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol
Internet service provider
IP address
Internet Message Access Protocol
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Domain Name System
	Bullet Point 2: Hypertext Transfer Protocol
	Bullet Point 3: Internet exchange point
	Bullet Point 4: Internet protocol suite
Internet Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol
	Bullet Point 5: Internet service provider
	Bullet Point 6: IP address
	Bullet Point 7: Internet Message Access Protocol
	Bullet Point 8: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
Internet protocol suite
Internet Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Internet Protocol
	Bullet Point 2: Transmission Control Protocol
hideServices
Blogs
Microblogging
Email
Fax
File sharing
File transfer
Games
Instant messaging
Podcasts
Shopping
Television
Voice over IP
World Wide Web
search
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Blogs
Microblogging
	Bullet Point 2: Email
	Bullet Point 3: Fax
	Bullet Point 4: File sharing
	Bullet Point 5: File transfer
	Bullet Point 6: Games
	Bullet Point 7: Instant messaging
	Bullet Point 8: Podcasts
	Bullet Point 9: Shopping
	Bullet Point 10: Television
	Bullet Point 11: Voice over IP
	Bullet Point 12: World Wide Web
search
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Microblogging
hideHistory
History of the Internet
Oldest domain names
Pioneers
Protocol Wars
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: History of the Internet
	Bullet Point 2: Oldest domain names
	Bullet Point 3: Pioneers
	Bullet Point 4: Protocol Wars
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1:  Index
	Bullet Point 2: Outline
The webpage contains an image of a icon here.
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: v
	Bullet Point 2: t
	Bullet Point 3: e
Computer network typesby scale
Nanoscale
Near-field (NFC)
Body
Personal (PAN)
Near-me
Local (LAN)
Storage (SAN)
Wireless (WLAN)
Virtual (VLAN)
Home (HAN)
Building
Campus (CAN)
Backbone
Metropolitan (MAN)
Municipal wireless (MWN)
Wide (WAN)
Cloud
Internet
Interplanetary Internet
vte
The webpage contains an image of a Data Networks classification by spatial scope.svg here.
Nanoscale
Near-field (NFC)
Body
Personal (PAN)
Near-me
Local (LAN)
Storage (SAN)
Wireless (WLAN)
Virtual (VLAN)
Home (HAN)
Building
Campus (CAN)
Backbone
Metropolitan (MAN)
Municipal wireless (MWN)
Wide (WAN)
Cloud
Internet
Interplanetary Internet
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Nanoscale
	Bullet Point 2: Near-field (NFC)
	Bullet Point 3: Body
	Bullet Point 4: Personal (PAN)
	Bullet Point 5: Near-me
	Bullet Point 6: Local (LAN)
Storage (SAN)
Wireless (WLAN)
Virtual (VLAN)
	Bullet Point 7: Home (HAN)
	Bullet Point 8: Building
	Bullet Point 9: Campus (CAN)
	Bullet Point 10: Backbone
	Bullet Point 11: Metropolitan (MAN)
Municipal wireless (MWN)
	Bullet Point 12: Wide (WAN)
	Bullet Point 13: Cloud
	Bullet Point 14: Internet
	Bullet Point 15: Interplanetary Internet
Local (LAN)
Storage (SAN)
Wireless (WLAN)
Virtual (VLAN)
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Storage (SAN)
	Bullet Point 2: Wireless (WLAN)
	Bullet Point 3: Virtual (VLAN)
Metropolitan (MAN)
Municipal wireless (MWN)
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Municipal wireless (MWN)
The Internet (or internet)[a] is the global system of interconnected computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP)[b] to communicate between networks and devices. It is a network of networks that consists of private, public, academic, business, and government networks of local to global scope, linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies. The Internet carries a vast range of information resources and services, such as the interlinked hypertext documents and applications of the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, telephony, and file sharing.
The origins of the Internet date back to the development of packet switching and research commissioned by the United States Department of Defense in the late 1960s to enable time-sharing of computers.[2] The primary precursor network, the ARPANET, initially served as a backbone for the interconnection of regional academic and military networks in the 1970s to enable resource sharing. The funding of the National Science Foundation Network as a new backbone in the 1980s, as well as private funding for other commercial extensions, led to worldwide participation in the development of new networking technologies, and the merger of many networks.[3] The linking of commercial networks and enterprises by the early 1990s marked the beginning of the transition to the modern Internet,[4] and generated a sustained exponential growth as generations of institutional, personal, and mobile computers were connected to the network. Although the Internet was widely used by academia in the 1980s, commercialization incorporated its services and technologies into virtually every aspect of modern life.
Most traditional communication media, including telephone, radio, television, paper mail, and newspapers, are reshaped, redefined, or even bypassed by the Internet, giving birth to new services such as email, Internet telephone, Internet television, online music, digital newspapers, and video streaming websites. Newspaper, book, and other print publishing have adapted to website technology or have been reshaped into blogging, web feeds, and online news aggregators. The Internet has enabled and accelerated new forms of personal interaction through instant messaging, Internet forums, and social networking services. Online shopping has grown exponentially for major retailers, small businesses, and entrepreneurs, as it enables firms to extend their "brick and mortar" presence to serve a larger market or even sell goods and services entirely online. Business-to-business and financial services on the Internet affect supply chains across entire industries.
The Internet has no single centralized governance in either technological implementation or policies for access and usage; each constituent network sets its own policies.[5] The overarching definitions of the two principal name spaces on the Internet, the Internet Protocol address (IP address) space and the Domain Name System (DNS), are directed by a maintainer organization, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise.[6] In November 2006, the Internet was included on USA Today's list of New Seven Wonders.[7]
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
The word internetted was used as early as 1849, meaning interconnected or interwoven.[8] The word Internet was used in 1945 by the United States War Department in a radio operator's manual,[9] and 1974 as the shorthand form of Internetwork.[10] Today, the term Internet most commonly refers to the global system of interconnected computer networks, though it may also refer to any group of smaller networks.[11]
When it came into common use, most publications treated the word Internet as a capitalized proper noun; this has become less common.[11] This reflects the tendency in English to capitalize new terms and move to lowercase as they become familiar.[11][12] The word is sometimes still capitalized to distinguish the global internet from smaller networks, though many publications, including the AP Stylebook since 2016, recommend the lowercase form in every case.[11][12] In 2016, the Oxford English Dictionary found that, based on a study of around 2.5 billion printed and online sources, "Internet" was capitalized in 54% of cases.[13]
The terms Internet and World Wide Web are often used interchangeably; it is common to speak of "going on the Internet" when using a web browser to view web pages. However, the World Wide Web or the Web is only one of a large number of Internet services,[14] a collection of documents (web pages) and other web resources, linked by hyperlinks and URLs.[15]
In the 1960s, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defense (DoD) funded research into time-sharing of computers.[16][17][18] J. C. R. Licklider proposed the idea of a universal network while leading the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) at ARPA. Research into packet switching, one of the fundamental Internet technologies, started in the work of Paul Baran in the early 1960s and, independently, Donald Davies in 1965.[2][19] After the Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in 1967, packet switching from the proposed NPL network was incorporated into the design for the ARPANET and other resource sharing networks such as the Merit Network and CYCLADES, which were developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s.[20]
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
ARPANET development began with two network nodes which were interconnected between the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and SRI International (SRI) on 29 October 1969.[21] The third site was at the University of California, Santa Barbara, followed by the University of Utah. In a sign of future growth, 15 sites were connected to the young ARPANET by the end of 1971.[22][23] These early years were documented in the 1972 film Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing.[24] Thereafter, the ARPANET gradually developed into a decentralized communications network, connecting remote centers and military bases in the United States.[25]
Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing
Early international collaborations for the ARPANET were rare. Connections were made in 1973 to the Norwegian Seismic Array (NORSAR),[26] and to University College London which provided a gateway to British academic networks forming the first international resource sharing network.[27] ARPA projects, international working groups and commercial initiatives led to the development of various protocols and standards by which multiple separate networks could become a single network or "a network of networks".[28] In 1974, Bob Kahn at DARPA and Vint Cerf at Stanford University published their ideas for "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication".[29] They used the term internet as a shorthand for internetwork in RFC 675,[10] and later RFCs repeated this use. Kahn and Cerf credit Louis Pouzin with important influences on the resulting TCP/IP design.[30] National PTTs and commercial providers developed the X.25 standard and deployed it on public data networks.[31]
Access to the ARPANET was expanded in 1981 when the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded the Computer Science Network (CSNET). In 1982, the Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) was standardized, which permitted worldwide proliferation of interconnected networks. TCP/IP network access expanded again in 1986 when the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNet) provided access to supercomputer sites in the United States for researchers, first at speeds of 56 kbit/s and later at 1.5 Mbit/s and 45 Mbit/s.[32] The NSFNet expanded into academic and research organizations in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Japan in 1988–89.[33][34][35][36] Although other network protocols such as UUCP and PTT public data networks had global reach well before this time, this marked the beginning of the Internet as an intercontinental network. Commercial Internet service providers (ISPs) emerged in 1989 in the United States and Australia.[37] The ARPANET was decommissioned in 1990.[38]
The webpage contains an image of a Image#X here.
Steady advances in semiconductor technology and optical networking created new economic opportunities for commercial involvement in the expansion of the network in its core and for delivering services to the public. In mid-1989, MCI Mail and Compuserve established connections to the Internet, delivering email and public access products to the half million users of the Internet.[39] Just months later, on 1 January 1990, PSInet launched an alternate Internet backbone for commercial use; one of the networks that added to the core of the commercial Internet of later years. In March 1990, the first high-speed T1 (1.5 Mbit/s) link between the NSFNET and Europe was installed between Cornell University and CERN, allowing much more robust communications than were capable with satellites.[40] Six months later Tim Berners-Lee would begin writing WorldWideWeb, the first web browser, after two years of lobbying CERN management. By Christmas 1990, Berners-Lee had built all the tools necessary for a working Web: the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 0.9,[41] the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), the first Web browser (which was also an HTML editor and could access Usenet newsgroups and FTP files), the first HTTP server software (later known as CERN httpd), the first web server,[42] and the first Web pages that described the project itself. In 1991 the Commercial Internet eXchange was founded, allowing PSInet to communicate with the other commercial networks CERFnet and Alternet. Stanford Federal Credit Union was the first financial institution to offer online Internet banking services to all of its members in October 1994.[43] In 1996, OP Financial Group, also a cooperative bank, became the second online bank in the world and the first in Europe.[44] By 1995, the Internet was fully commercialized in the U.S. when the NSFNet was decommissioned, removing the last restrictions on use of the Internet to carry commercial traffic.[45]
Worldwide Internet users[46]


Users
2005
2010
2017
2019
2021


World population[47]

6.5 billion

6.9 billion

7.4 billion

7.75 billion

7.9 billion


Worldwide

16%

30%

48%

53.6%

63%


In developing world

8%

21%

41.3%

47%

57%


In developed world

51%

67%

81%

86.6%

90%
Users
2005
2010
2017
2019
2021


World population[47]

6.5 billion

6.9 billion

7.4 billion

7.75 billion

7.9 billion


Worldwide

16%

30%

48%

53.6%

63%


In developing world

8%

21%

41.3%

47%

57%


In developed world

51%

67%

81%

86.6%

90%
World population[47]

6.5 billion

6.9 billion

7.4 billion

7.75 billion

7.9 billion
In developing world

8%

21%

41.3%

47%

57%
In developed world

51%

67%

81%

86.6%

90%
As technology advanced and commercial opportunities fueled reciprocal growth, the volume of Internet traffic started experiencing similar characteristics as that of the scaling of MOS transistors, exemplified by Moore's law, doubling every 18 months. This growth, formalized as Edholm's law, was catalyzed by advances in MOS technology, laser light wave systems, and noise performance.[48]
Since 1995, the Internet has tremendously impacted culture and commerce, including the rise of near-instant communication by email, instant messaging, telephony (Voice over Internet Protocol or VoIP), two-way interactive video calls, and the World Wide Web[49] with its discussion forums, blogs, social networking services, and online shopping sites. Increasing amounts of data are transmitted at higher and higher speeds over fiber optic networks operating at 1 Gbit/s, 10 Gbit/s, or more. The Internet continues to grow, driven by ever-greater amounts of online information and knowledge, commerce, entertainment and social networking services.[50] During the late 1990s, it was estimated that traffic on the public Internet grew by 100 percent per year, while the mean annual growth in the number of Internet users was thought to be between 20% and 50%.[51] This growth is often attributed to the lack of central administration, which allows organic growth of the network, as well as the non-proprietary nature of the Internet protocols, which encourages vendor interoperability and prevents any one company from exerting too much control over the network.[52] As of 31 March 2011[update], the estimated total number of Internet users was 2.095 billion (30.2% of world population).[53] It is estimated that in 1993 the Internet carried only 1% of the information flowing through two-way telecommunication. By 2000 this figure had grown to 51%, and by 2007 more than 97% of all telecommunicated information was carried over the Internet.[54]
The Internet is a global network that comprises many voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks. It operates without a central governing body. The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise. To maintain interoperability, the principal name spaces of the Internet are administered by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). ICANN is governed by an international board of directors drawn from across the Internet technical, business, academic, and other non-commercial communities. ICANN coordinates the assignment of unique identifiers for use on the Internet, including domain names, IP addresses, application port numbers in the transport protocols, and many other parameters. Globally unified name spaces are essential for maintaining the global reach of the Internet. This role of ICANN distinguishes it as perhaps the only central coordinating body for the global Internet.[55]
Regional Internet registries (RIRs) were established for five regions of the world. The African Network Information Center (AfriNIC) for Africa, the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) for North America, the Asia-Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC) for Asia and the Pacific region, the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry (LACNIC) for Latin America and the Caribbean region, and the Réseaux IP Européens – Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) for Europe, the Middle East, and Central Asia were delegated to assign IP address blocks and other Internet parameters to local registries, such as Internet service providers, from a designated pool of addresses set aside for each region.
Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry
Réseaux IP Européens – Network Coordination Centre
The National Telecommunications and Information Administration, an agency of the United States Department of Commerce, had final approval over changes to the DNS root zone until the IANA stewardship transition on 1 October 2016.[56][57][58][59] The Internet Society (ISOC) was founded in 1992 with a mission to "assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world".[60] Its members include individuals (anyone may join) as well as corporations, organizations, governments, and universities. Among other activities ISOC provides an administrative home for a number of less formally organized groups that are involved in developing and managing the Internet, including: the IETF, Internet Architecture Board (IAB), Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), and Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG). On 16 November 2005, the United Nations-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis established the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to discuss Internet-related issues.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration
"assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world"
List of countries by number of Internet users
List of countries by Internet connection speeds
The communications infrastructure of the Internet consists of its hardware components and a system of software layers that control various aspects of the architecture. As with any computer network, the Internet physically consists of routers, media (such as cabling and radio links), repeaters, modems etc. However, as an example of internetworking, many of the network nodes are not necessarily internet equipment per se, the internet packets are carried by other full-fledged networking protocols with the Internet acting as a homogeneous networking standard, running across heterogeneous hardware, with the packets guided to their destinations by IP routers.
Internet service providers (ISPs) establish the worldwide connectivity between individual networks at various levels of scope. End-users who only access the Internet when needed to perform a function or obtain information, represent the bottom of the routing hierarchy. At the top of the routing hierarchy are the tier 1 networks, large telecommunication companies that exchange traffic directly with each other via very high speed fiber-optic cables and governed by peering agreements. Tier 2 and lower-level networks buy Internet transit from other providers to reach at least some parties on the global Internet, though they may also engage in peering. An ISP may use a single upstream provider for connectivity, or implement multihoming to achieve redundancy and load balancing. Internet exchange points are major traffic exchanges with physical connections to multiple ISPs. Large organizations, such as academic institutions, large enterprises, and governments, may perform the same function as ISPs, engaging in peering and purchasing transit on behalf of their internal networks. Research networks tend to interconnect with large subnetworks such as GEANT, GLORIAD, Internet2, and the UK's national research and education network, JANET.
Common methods of Internet access by users include dial-up with a computer modem via telephone circuits, broadband over coaxial cable, fiber optics or copper wires, Wi-Fi, satellite, and cellular telephone technology (e.g. 3G, 4G). The Internet may often be accessed from computers in libraries and Internet cafés. Internet access points exist in many public places such as airport halls and coffee shops. Various terms are used, such as public Internet kiosk, public access terminal, and Web payphone. Many hotels also have public terminals that are usually fee-based. These terminals are widely accessed for various usages, such as ticket booking, bank deposit, or online payment. Wi-Fi provides wireless access to the Internet via local computer networks. Hotspots providing such access include Wi-Fi cafés, where users need to bring their own wireless devices, such as a laptop or PDA. These services may be free to all, free to customers only, or fee-based.
Grassroots efforts have led to wireless community networks. Commercial Wi-Fi services that cover large areas are available in many cities, such as New York, London, Vienna, Toronto, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago and Pittsburgh, where the Internet can then be accessed from places such as a park bench.[61] Experiments have also been conducted with proprietary mobile wireless networks like Ricochet, various high-speed data services over cellular networks, and fixed wireless services. Modern smartphones can also access the Internet through the cellular carrier network. For Web browsing, these devices provide applications such as Google Chrome, Safari, and Firefox and a wide variety of other Internet software may be installed from app stores. Internet usage by mobile and tablet devices exceeded desktop worldwide for the first time in October 2016.[62]
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) estimated that, by the end of 2017, 48% of individual users regularly connect to the Internet, up from 34% in 2012.[63] Mobile Internet connectivity has played an important role in expanding access in recent years, especially in Asia and the Pacific and in Africa.[64] The number of unique mobile cellular subscriptions increased from 3.89 billion in 2012 to 4.83 billion in 2016, two-thirds of the world's population, with more than half of subscriptions located in Asia and the Pacific. The number of subscriptions is predicted to rise to 5.69 billion users in 2020.[65] As of 2016[update], almost 60% of the world's population had access to a 4G broadband cellular network, up from almost 50% in 2015 and 11% in 2012.[disputed  – discuss][65] The limits that users face on accessing information via mobile applications coincide with a broader process of fragmentation of the Internet. Fragmentation restricts access to media content and tends to affect the poorest users the most.[64]
Zero-rating, the practice of Internet service providers allowing users free connectivity to access specific content or applications without cost, has offered opportunities to surmount economic hurdles but has also been accused by its critics as creating a two-tiered Internet. To address the issues with zero-rating, an alternative model has emerged in the concept of 'equal rating' and is being tested in experiments by Mozilla and Orange in Africa. Equal rating prevents prioritization of one type of content and zero-rates all content up to a specified data cap. In a study published by Chatham House, 15 out of 19 countries researched in Latin America had some kind of hybrid or zero-rated product offered. Some countries in the region had a handful of plans to choose from (across all mobile network operators) while others, such as Colombia, offered as many as 30 pre-paid and 34 post-paid plans.[66]
A study of eight countries in the Global South found that zero-rated data plans exist in every country, although there is a great range in the frequency with which they are offered and actually used in each.[67] The study looked at the top three to five carriers by market share in Bangladesh, Colombia, Ghana, India, Kenya, Nigeria, Peru and Philippines. Across the 181 plans examined, 13 percent were offering zero-rated services. Another study, covering Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa, found Facebook's Free Basics and Wikipedia Zero to be the most commonly zero-rated content.[68]
Internet protocol suite
Application layer
BGP
DHCP (v6)
DNS
FTP
HTTP (HTTP/3)
HTTPS
IMAP
IRC
LDAP
MGCP
MQTT
NNTP
NTP
OSPF
POP
PTP
ONC/RPC
RTP
RTSP
RIP
SIP
SMTP
SNMP
SSH
Telnet
TLS/SSL
XMPP
more...

Transport layer
TCP
UDP
DCCP
SCTP
RSVP
QUIC
more...

Internet layer
IP
v4
v6
ICMP (v6)
NDP
ECN
IGMP
IPsec
more...

Link layer
Tunnels
PPP
MAC
more...
vte
BGP
DHCP (v6)
DNS
FTP
HTTP (HTTP/3)
HTTPS
IMAP
IRC
LDAP
MGCP
MQTT
NNTP
NTP
OSPF
POP
PTP
ONC/RPC
RTP
RTSP
RIP
SIP
SMTP
SNMP
SSH
Telnet
TLS/SSL
XMPP
more...
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: BGP
	Bullet Point 2: DHCP (v6)
	Bullet Point 3: DNS
	Bullet Point 4: FTP
	Bullet Point 5: HTTP (HTTP/3)
	Bullet Point 6: HTTPS
	Bullet Point 7: IMAP
	Bullet Point 8: IRC
	Bullet Point 9: LDAP
	Bullet Point 10: MGCP
	Bullet Point 11: MQTT
	Bullet Point 12: NNTP
	Bullet Point 13: NTP
	Bullet Point 14: OSPF
	Bullet Point 15: POP
	Bullet Point 16: PTP
	Bullet Point 17: ONC/RPC
	Bullet Point 18: RTP
	Bullet Point 19: RTSP
	Bullet Point 20: RIP
	Bullet Point 21: SIP
	Bullet Point 22: SMTP
	Bullet Point 23: SNMP
	Bullet Point 24: SSH
	Bullet Point 25: Telnet
	Bullet Point 26: TLS/SSL
	Bullet Point 27: XMPP
	Bullet Point 28: more...
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: TCP
	Bullet Point 2: UDP
	Bullet Point 3: DCCP
	Bullet Point 4: SCTP
	Bullet Point 5: RSVP
	Bullet Point 6: QUIC
	Bullet Point 7: more...
IP
v4
v6
ICMP (v6)
NDP
ECN
IGMP
IPsec
more...
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: IP
v4
v6
	Bullet Point 2: ICMP (v6)
	Bullet Point 3: NDP
	Bullet Point 4: ECN
	Bullet Point 5: IGMP
	Bullet Point 6: IPsec
	Bullet Point 7: more...
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: v4
	Bullet Point 2: v6
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Tunnels
	Bullet Point 2: PPP
	Bullet Point 3: MAC
	Bullet Point 4: more...
The Internet standards describe a framework known as the Internet protocol suite (also called TCP/IP, based on the first two components.) This is a suite of protocols that are ordered into a set of four conceptional layers by the scope of their operation, originally documented in RFC 1122 and RFC 1123. At the top is the application layer, where communication is described in terms of the objects or data structures most appropriate for each application. For example, a web browser operates in a client–server application model and exchanges information with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and an application-germane data structure, such as the HyperText Markup Language (HTML).
Below this top layer, the transport layer connects applications on different hosts with a logical channel through the network. It provides this service with a variety of possible characteristics, such as ordered, reliable delivery (TCP), and an unreliable datagram service (UDP).
Underlying these layers are the networking technologies that interconnect networks at their borders and exchange traffic across them. The Internet layer implements the Internet Protocol (IP) which enables computers to identify and locate each other by IP address and route their traffic via intermediate (transit) networks.[69] The internet protocol layer code is independent of the type of network that it is physically running over.
At the bottom of the architecture is the link layer, which connects nodes on the same physical link, and contains protocols that do not require routers for traversal to other links. The protocol suite does not explicitly specify hardware methods to transfer bits, or protocols to manage such hardware, but assumes that appropriate technology is available. Examples of that technology include Wi-Fi, Ethernet, and DSL.
The most prominent component of the Internet model is the Internet Protocol (IP). IP enables internetworking and, in essence, establishes the Internet itself. Two versions of the Internet Protocol exist, IPv4 and IPv6.
For locating individual computers on the network, the Internet provides IP addresses. IP addresses are used by the Internet infrastructure to direct internet packets to their destinations. They consist of fixed-length numbers, which are found within the packet. IP addresses are generally assigned to equipment either automatically via DHCP, or are configured.
However, the network also supports other addressing systems. Users generally enter domain names (e.g. "en.wikipedia.org") instead of IP addresses because they are easier to remember, they are converted by the Domain Name System (DNS) into IP addresses which are more efficient for routing purposes.
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number.[69] IPv4 is the initial version used on the first generation of the Internet and is still in dominant use. It was designed to address up to ≈4.3 billion (109) hosts. However, the explosive growth of the Internet has led to IPv4 address exhaustion, which entered its final stage in 2011,[70] when the global IPv4 address allocation pool was exhausted.
Because of the growth of the Internet and the depletion of available IPv4 addresses, a new version of IP IPv6, was developed in the mid-1990s, which provides vastly larger addressing capabilities and more efficient routing of Internet traffic. IPv6 uses 128 bits for the IP address and was standardized in 1998.[71][72][73] IPv6 deployment has been ongoing since the mid-2000s and is currently in growing deployment around the world, since Internet address registries (RIRs) began to urge all resource managers to plan rapid adoption and conversion.[74]
IPv6 is not directly interoperable by design with IPv4. In essence, it establishes a parallel version of the Internet not directly accessible with IPv4 software. Thus, translation facilities must exist for internetworking or nodes must have duplicate networking software for both networks. Essentially all modern computer operating systems support both versions of the Internet Protocol. Network infrastructure, however, has been lagging in this development. Aside from the complex array of physical connections that make up its infrastructure, the Internet is facilitated by bi- or multi-lateral commercial contracts, e.g., peering agreements, and by technical specifications or protocols that describe the exchange of data over the network. Indeed, the Internet is defined by its interconnections and routing policies.
A subnetwork or subnet is a logical subdivision of an IP network.[75]: 1, 16  The practice of dividing a network into two or more networks is called subnetting.
Computers that belong to a subnet are addressed with an identical most-significant bit-group in their IP addresses. This results in the logical division of an IP address into two fields, the network number or routing prefix and the rest field or host identifier. The rest field is an identifier for a specific host or network interface.
The routing prefix may be expressed in Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation written as the first address of a network, followed by a slash character (/), and ending with the bit-length of the prefix. For example, 198.51.100.0/24 is the prefix of the Internet Protocol version 4 network starting at the given address, having 24 bits allocated for the network prefix, and the remaining 8 bits reserved for host addressing. Addresses in the range 198.51.100.0 to 198.51.100.255 belong to this network. The IPv6 address specification 2001:db8::/32 is a large address block with 296 addresses, having a 32-bit routing prefix.
For IPv4, a network may also be characterized by its subnet mask or netmask, which is the bitmask that when applied by a bitwise AND operation to any IP address in the network, yields the routing prefix. Subnet masks are also expressed in dot-decimal notation like an address. For example, 255.255.255.0 is the subnet mask for the prefix 198.51.100.0/24.
Traffic is exchanged between subnetworks through routers when the routing prefixes of the source address and the destination address differ. A router serves as a logical or physical boundary between the subnets.
The benefits of subnetting an existing network vary with each deployment scenario. In the address allocation architecture of the Internet using CIDR and in large organizations, it is necessary to allocate address space efficiently. Subnetting may also enhance routing efficiency, or have advantages in network management when subnetworks are administratively controlled by different entities in a larger organization. Subnets may be arranged logically in a hierarchical architecture, partitioning an organization's network address space into a tree-like routing structure.
Computers and routers use routing tables in their operating system to direct IP packets to reach a node on a different subnetwork. Routing tables are maintained by manual configuration or automatically by routing protocols. End-nodes typically use a default route that points toward an ISP providing transit, while ISP routers use the Border Gateway Protocol to establish the most efficient routing across the complex connections of the global Internet. The default gateway is the node that serves as the forwarding host (router) to other networks when no other route specification matches the destination IP address of a packet.[76][77]
While the hardware components in the Internet infrastructure can often be used to support other software systems, it is the design and the standardization process of the software that characterizes the Internet and provides the foundation for its scalability and success. The responsibility for the architectural design of the Internet software systems has been assumed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).[78] The IETF conducts standard-setting work groups, open to any individual, about the various aspects of Internet architecture. The resulting contributions and standards are published as Request for Comments (RFC) documents on the IETF web site. The principal methods of networking that enable the Internet are contained in specially designated RFCs that constitute the Internet Standards. Other less rigorous documents are simply informative, experimental, or historical, or document the best current practices (BCP) when implementing Internet technologies.
The Internet carries many applications and services, most prominently the World Wide Web, including social media, electronic mail, mobile applications, multiplayer online games, Internet telephony, file sharing, and streaming media services.
Most servers that provide these services are today hosted in data centers, and content is often accessed through high-performance content delivery networks.
The World Wide Web is a global collection of documents, images, multimedia, applications, and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs), which provide a global system of named references. URIs symbolically identify services, web servers, databases, and the documents and resources that they can provide. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the main access protocol of the World Wide Web. Web services also use HTTP for communication between software systems for information transfer, sharing and exchanging business data and logistics and is one of many languages or protocols that can be used for communication on the Internet.[79]
World Wide Web browser software, such as Microsoft's Internet Explorer/Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Apple's Safari, and Google Chrome, lets users navigate from one web page to another via the hyperlinks embedded in the documents. These documents may also contain any combination of computer data, including graphics, sounds, text, video, multimedia and interactive content that runs while the user is interacting with the page. Client-side software can include animations, games, office applications and scientific demonstrations. Through keyword-driven Internet research using search engines like Yahoo!, Bing and Google, users worldwide have easy, instant access to a vast and diverse amount of online information. Compared to printed media, books, encyclopedias and traditional libraries, the World Wide Web has enabled the decentralization of information on a large scale.
The Web has enabled individuals and organizations to publish ideas and information to a potentially large audience online at greatly reduced expense and time delay. Publishing a web page, a blog, or building a website involves little initial cost and many cost-free services are available. However, publishing and maintaining large, professional web sites with attractive, diverse and up-to-date information is still a difficult and expensive proposition. Many individuals and some companies and groups use web logs or blogs, which are largely used as easily updatable online diaries. Some commercial organizations encourage staff to communicate advice in their areas of specialization in the hope that visitors will be impressed by the expert knowledge and free information, and be attracted to the corporation as a result.
Advertising on popular web pages can be lucrative, and e-commerce, which is the sale of products and services directly via the Web, continues to grow. Online advertising is a form of marketing and advertising which uses the Internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers. It includes email marketing, search engine marketing (SEM), social media marketing, many types of display advertising (including web banner advertising), and mobile advertising. In 2011, Internet advertising revenues in the United States surpassed those of cable television and nearly exceeded those of broadcast television.[80]: 19  Many common online advertising practices are controversial and increasingly subject to regulation.
When the Web developed in the 1990s, a typical web page was stored in completed form on a web server, formatted in HTML, ready for transmission to a web browser in response to a request. Over time, the process of creating and serving web pages has become dynamic, creating a flexible design, layout, and content. Websites are often created using content management software with, initially, very little content. Contributors to these systems, who may be paid staff, members of an organization or the public, fill underlying databases with content using editing pages designed for that purpose while casual visitors view and read this content in HTML form. There may or may not be editorial, approval and security systems built into the process of taking newly entered content and making it available to the target visitors.
Email is an important communications service available via the Internet. The concept of sending electronic text messages between parties, analogous to mailing letters or memos, predates the creation of the Internet.[81][82] Pictures, documents, and other files are sent as email attachments. Email messages can be cc-ed to multiple email addresses.
Internet telephony is a common communications service realized with the Internet. The name of the principal internetworking protocol, the Internet Protocol, lends its name to voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). The idea began in the early 1990s with walkie-talkie-like voice applications for personal computers. VoIP systems now dominate many markets and are as easy to use and as convenient as a traditional telephone. The benefit has been substantial cost savings over traditional telephone calls, especially over long distances. Cable, ADSL, and mobile data networks provide Internet access in customer premises[83] and inexpensive VoIP network adapters provide the connection for traditional analog telephone sets. The voice quality of VoIP often exceeds that of traditional calls. Remaining problems for VoIP include the situation that emergency services may not be universally available and that devices rely on a local power supply, while older traditional phones are powered from the local loop, and typically operate during a power failure.
File sharing is an example of transferring large amounts of data across the Internet. A computer file can be emailed to customers, colleagues and friends as an attachment. It can be uploaded to a website or File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server for easy download by others. It can be put into a "shared location" or onto a file server for instant use by colleagues. The load of bulk downloads to many users can be eased by the use of "mirror" servers or peer-to-peer networks. In any of these cases, access to the file may be controlled by user authentication, the transit of the file over the Internet may be obscured by encryption, and money may change hands for access to the file. The price can be paid by the remote charging of funds from, for example, a credit card whose details are also passed—usually fully encrypted—across the Internet. The origin and authenticity of the file received may be checked by digital signatures or by MD5 or other message digests. These simple features of the Internet, over a worldwide basis, are changing the production, sale, and distribution of anything that can be reduced to a computer file for transmission. This includes all manner of print publications, software products, news, music, film, video, photography, graphics and the other arts. This in turn has caused seismic shifts in each of the existing industries that previously controlled the production and distribution of these products.
Streaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users. Many radio and television broadcasters provide Internet feeds of their live audio and video productions. They may also allow time-shift viewing or listening such as Preview, Classic Clips and Listen Again features. These providers have been joined by a range of pure Internet "broadcasters" who never had on-air licenses. This means that an Internet-connected device, such as a computer or something more specific, can be used to access online media in much the same way as was previously possible only with a television or radio receiver. The range of available types of content is much wider, from specialized technical webcasts to on-demand popular multimedia services. Podcasting is a variation on this theme, where—usually audio—material is downloaded and played back on a computer or shifted to a portable media player to be listened to on the move. These techniques using simple equipment allow anybody, with little censorship or licensing control, to broadcast audio-visual material worldwide.
Digital media streaming increases the demand for network bandwidth. For example, standard image quality needs 1 Mbit/s link speed for SD 480p, HD 720p quality requires 2.5 Mbit/s, and the top-of-the-line HDX quality needs 4.5 Mbit/s for 1080p.[84]
Webcams are a low-cost extension of this phenomenon. While some webcams can give full-frame-rate video, the picture either is usually small or updates slowly. Internet users can watch animals around an African waterhole, ships in the Panama Canal, traffic at a local roundabout or monitor their own premises, live and in real time. Video chat rooms and video conferencing are also popular with many uses being found for personal webcams, with and without two-way sound. YouTube was founded on 15 February 2005 and is now the leading website for free streaming video with more than two billion users.[85] It uses an HTML5 based web player by default to stream and show video files.[86] Registered users may upload an unlimited amount of video and build their own personal profile. YouTube claims that its users watch hundreds of millions, and upload hundreds of thousands of videos daily.
The Internet has enabled new forms of social interaction, activities, and social associations. This phenomenon has given rise to the scholarly study of the sociology of the Internet.
The early Internet left an impact on some writers who used symbolism to write about it, such as describing the Internet as a "means to connect individuals in a vast invisible net over all the earth."[87]
The webpage contains an image of a A scatter plot showing Internet usage per capita versus GDP per capita. It shows Internet usage increasing with GDP. here.
Source: International Telecommunication Union.
From 2000 to 2009, the number of Internet users globally rose from 394 million to 1.858 billion.[91] By 2010, 22 percent of the world's population had access to computers with 1 billion Google searches every day, 300 million Internet users reading blogs, and 2 billion videos viewed daily on YouTube.[92] In 2014 the world's Internet users surpassed 3 billion or 43.6 percent of world population, but two-thirds of the users came from richest countries, with 78.0 percent of Europe countries population using the Internet, followed by 57.4 percent of the Americas.[93] However, by 2018, Asia alone accounted for 51% of all Internet users, with 2.2 billion out of the 4.3 billion Internet users in the world coming from that region. The number of China's Internet users surpassed a major milestone in 2018, when the country's Internet regulatory authority, China Internet Network Information Centre, announced that China had 802 million Internet users.[94] By 2019, China was the world's leading country in terms of Internet users, with more than 800 million users, followed closely by India, with some 700 million users, with the United States a distant third with 275 million users. However, in terms of penetration, China has[when?] a 38.4% penetration rate compared to India's 40% and the United States's 80%.[95] As of 2020, it was estimated that 4.5 billion people use the Internet, more than half of the world's population.[96][97]
The prevalent language for communication via the Internet has always been English. This may be a result of the origin of the Internet, as well as the language's role as a lingua franca and as a world language. Early computer systems were limited to the characters in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a subset of the Latin alphabet.
American Standard Code for Information Interchange
After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are Chinese (25%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4% each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%).[98] By region, 42% of the world's Internet users are based in Asia, 24% in Europe, 14% in North America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean taken together, 6% in Africa, 3% in the Middle East and 1% in Australia/Oceania.[99] The Internet's technologies have developed enough in recent years, especially in the use of Unicode, that good facilities are available for development and communication in the world's widely used languages. However, some glitches such as mojibake (incorrect display of some languages' characters) still remain.
In an American study in 2005, the percentage of men using the Internet was very slightly ahead of the percentage of women, although this difference reversed in those under 30. Men logged on more often, spent more time online, and were more likely to be broadband users, whereas women tended to make more use of opportunities to communicate (such as email). Men were more likely to use the Internet to pay bills, participate in auctions, and for recreation such as downloading music and videos. Men and women were equally likely to use the Internet for shopping and banking.[100]
More recent studies indicate that in 2008, women significantly outnumbered men on most social networking services, such as Facebook and Myspace, although the ratios varied with age.[101] In addition, women watched more streaming content, whereas men downloaded more.[102] In terms of blogs, men were more likely to blog in the first place; among those who blog, men were more likely to have a professional blog, whereas women were more likely to have a personal blog.[103]
Splitting by country, in 2012 Iceland, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Denmark had the highest Internet penetration by the number of users, with 93% or more of the population with access.[104]
Internet penetration by the number of users
Several neologisms exist that refer to Internet users: Netizen (as in "citizen of the net")[105] refers to those actively involved in improving online communities, the Internet in general or surrounding political affairs and rights such as free speech,[106][107] Internaut refers to operators or technically highly capable users of the Internet,[108][109] digital citizen refers to a person using the Internet in order to engage in society, politics, and government participation.[110]
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 


Internet users by language[98]


	Bullet Point 2: 


Website content languages[111]


The webpage contains an image of a Internet users by language[98] here.
The webpage contains an image of a Website content languages[111] here.
Internet users in 2015 as a percentage of a country's population
Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions in 2012
Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions in 2012
The Internet allows greater flexibility in working hours and location, especially with the spread of unmetered high-speed connections. The Internet can be accessed almost anywhere by numerous means, including through mobile Internet devices. Mobile phones, datacards, handheld game consoles and cellular routers allow users to connect to the Internet wirelessly. Within the limitations imposed by small screens and other limited facilities of such pocket-sized devices, the services of the Internet, including email and the web, may be available. Service providers may restrict the services offered and mobile data charges may be significantly higher than other access methods.
Educational material at all levels from pre-school to post-doctoral is available from websites. Examples range from CBeebies, through school and high-school revision guides and virtual universities, to access to top-end scholarly literature through the likes of Google Scholar. For distance education, help with homework and other assignments, self-guided learning, whiling away spare time or just looking up more detail on an interesting fact, it has never been easier for people to access educational information at any level from anywhere. The Internet in general and the World Wide Web in particular are important enablers of both formal and informal education. Further, the Internet allows researchers (especially those from the social and behavioral sciences) to conduct research remotely via virtual laboratories, with profound changes in reach and generalizability of findings as well as in communication between scientists and in the publication of results.[114]
The low cost and nearly instantaneous sharing of ideas, knowledge, and skills have made collaborative work dramatically easier, with the help of collaborative software. Not only can a group cheaply communicate and share ideas but the wide reach of the Internet allows such groups more easily to form. An example of this is the free software movement, which has produced, among other things, Linux, Mozilla Firefox, and OpenOffice.org (later forked into LibreOffice). Internet chat, whether using an IRC chat room, an instant messaging system, or a social networking service, allows colleagues to stay in touch in a very convenient way while working at their computers during the day. Messages can be exchanged even more quickly and conveniently than via email. These systems may allow files to be exchanged, drawings and images to be shared, or voice and video contact between team members.
Content management systems allow collaborating teams to work on shared sets of documents simultaneously without accidentally destroying each other's work. Business and project teams can share calendars as well as documents and other information. Such collaboration occurs in a wide variety of areas including scientific research, software development, conference planning, political activism and creative writing. Social and political collaboration is also becoming more widespread as both Internet access and computer literacy spread.
The Internet allows computer users to remotely access other computers and information stores easily from any access point. Access may be with computer security, i.e. authentication and encryption technologies, depending on the requirements. This is encouraging new ways of remote work, collaboration and information sharing in many industries. An accountant sitting at home can audit the books of a company based in another country, on a server situated in a third country that is remotely maintained by IT specialists in a fourth. These accounts could have been created by home-working bookkeepers, in other remote locations, based on information emailed to them from offices all over the world. Some of these things were possible before the widespread use of the Internet, but the cost of private leased lines would have made many of them infeasible in practice. An office worker away from their desk, perhaps on the other side of the world on a business trip or a holiday, can access their emails, access their data using cloud computing, or open a remote desktop session into their office PC using a secure virtual private network (VPN) connection on the Internet. This can give the worker complete access to all of their normal files and data, including email and other applications, while away from the office. It has been referred to among system administrators as the Virtual Private Nightmare,[115] because it extends the secure perimeter of a corporate network into remote locations and its employees' homes.
By late 2010s Internet has been described as "the main source of scientific information "for the majority of the global North population".[116]: 111
Social networking service § Social impact
Many people use the World Wide Web to access news, weather and sports reports, to plan and book vacations and to pursue their personal interests. People use chat, messaging and email to make and stay in touch with friends worldwide, sometimes in the same way as some previously had pen pals. Social networking services such as Facebook have created new ways to socialize and interact. Users of these sites are able to add a wide variety of information to pages, pursue common interests, and connect with others. It is also possible to find existing acquaintances, to allow communication among existing groups of people. Sites like LinkedIn foster commercial and business connections. YouTube and Flickr specialize in users' videos and photographs. Social networking services are also widely used by businesses and other organizations to promote their brands, to market to their customers and to encourage posts to "go viral". "Black hat" social media techniques are also employed by some organizations, such as spam accounts and astroturfing.
A risk for both individuals and organizations writing posts (especially public posts) on social networking services, is that especially foolish or controversial posts occasionally lead to an unexpected and possibly large-scale backlash on social media from other Internet users. This is also a risk in relation to controversial offline behavior, if it is widely made known. The nature of this backlash can range widely from counter-arguments and public mockery, through insults and hate speech, to, in extreme cases, rape and death threats. The online disinhibition effect describes the tendency of many individuals to behave more stridently or offensively online than they would in person. A significant number of feminist women have been the target of various forms of harassment in response to posts they have made on social media, and Twitter in particular has been criticised in the past for not doing enough to aid victims of online abuse.[117]
For organizations, such a backlash can cause overall brand damage, especially if reported by the media. However, this is not always the case, as any brand damage in the eyes of people with an opposing opinion to that presented by the organization could sometimes be outweighed by strengthening the brand in the eyes of others. Furthermore, if an organization or individual gives in to demands that others perceive as wrong-headed, that can then provoke a counter-backlash.
Some websites, such as Reddit, have rules forbidding the posting of personal information of individuals (also known as doxxing), due to concerns about such postings leading to mobs of large numbers of Internet users directing harassment at the specific individuals thereby identified. In particular, the Reddit rule forbidding the posting of personal information is widely understood to imply that all identifying photos and names must be censored in Facebook screenshots posted to Reddit. However, the interpretation of this rule in relation to public Twitter posts is less clear, and in any case, like-minded people online have many other ways they can use to direct each other's attention to public social media posts they disagree with.
Children also face dangers online such as cyberbullying and approaches by sexual predators, who sometimes pose as children themselves. Children may also encounter material that they may find upsetting, or material that their parents consider to be not age-appropriate. Due to naivety, they may also post personal information about themselves online, which could put them or their families at risk unless warned not to do so. Many parents choose to enable Internet filtering or supervise their children's online activities in an attempt to protect their children from inappropriate material on the Internet. The most popular social networking services, such as Facebook and Twitter, commonly forbid users under the age of 13. However, these policies are typically trivial to circumvent by registering an account with a false birth date, and a significant number of children aged under 13 join such sites anyway. Social networking services for younger children, which claim to provide better levels of protection for children, also exist.[118]
The Internet has been a major outlet for leisure activity since its inception, with entertaining social experiments such as MUDs and MOOs being conducted on university servers, and humor-related Usenet groups receiving much traffic.[119] Many Internet forums have sections devoted to games and funny videos.[119] The Internet pornography and online gambling industries have taken advantage of the World Wide Web. Although many governments have attempted to restrict both industries' use of the Internet, in general, this has failed to stop their widespread popularity.[120]
Another area of leisure activity on the Internet is multiplayer gaming.[121] This form of recreation creates communities, where people of all ages and origins enjoy the fast-paced world of multiplayer games. These range from MMORPG to first-person shooters, from role-playing video games to online gambling. While online gaming has been around since the 1970s, modern modes of online gaming began with subscription services such as GameSpy and MPlayer.[122] Non-subscribers were limited to certain types of game play or certain games. Many people use the Internet to access and download music, movies and other works for their enjoyment and relaxation. Free and fee-based services exist for all of these activities, using centralized servers and distributed peer-to-peer technologies. Some of these sources exercise more care with respect to the original artists' copyrights than others.
Internet usage has been correlated to users' loneliness.[123] Lonely people tend to use the Internet as an outlet for their feelings and to share their stories with others, such as in the "I am lonely will anyone speak to me" thread.
A 2017 book claimed that the Internet consolidates most aspects of human endeavor into singular arenas of which all of humanity are potential members and competitors, with fundamentally negative impacts on mental health as a result. While successes in each field of activity are pervasively visible and trumpeted, they are reserved for an extremely thin sliver of the world's most exceptional, leaving everyone else behind. Whereas, before the Internet, expectations of success in any field were supported by reasonable probabilities of achievement at the village, suburb, city or even state level, the same expectations in the Internet world are virtually certain to bring disappointment today: there is always someone else, somewhere on the planet, who can do better and take the now one-and-only top spot.[124]
Cybersectarianism is a new organizational form that involves, "highly dispersed small groups of practitioners that may remain largely anonymous within the larger social context and operate in relative secrecy, while still linked remotely to a larger network of believers who share a set of practices and texts, and often a common devotion to a particular leader. Overseas supporters provide funding and support; domestic practitioners distribute tracts, participate in acts of resistance, and share information on the internal situation with outsiders. Collectively, members and practitioners of such sects construct viable virtual communities of faith, exchanging personal testimonies and engaging in the collective study via email, online chat rooms, and web-based message boards."[125] In particular, the British government has raised concerns about the prospect of young British Muslims being indoctrinated into Islamic extremism by material on the Internet, being persuaded to join terrorist groups such as the so-called "Islamic State", and then potentially committing acts of terrorism on returning to Britain after fighting in Syria or Iraq.
Cyberslacking can become a drain on corporate resources; the average UK employee spent 57 minutes a day surfing the Web while at work, according to a 2003 study by Peninsula Business Services.[126] Internet addiction disorder is excessive computer use that interferes with daily life. Nicholas G. Carr believes that Internet use has other effects on individuals, for instance improving skills of scan-reading and interfering with the deep thinking that leads to true creativity.[127]
Electronic business (e-business) encompasses business processes spanning the entire value chain: purchasing, supply chain management, marketing, sales, customer service, and business relationship. E-commerce seeks to add revenue streams using the Internet to build and enhance relationships with clients and partners. According to International Data Corporation, the size of worldwide e-commerce, when global business-to-business and -consumer transactions are combined, equate to $16 trillion for 2013. A report by Oxford Economics added those two together to estimate the total size of the digital economy at $20.4 trillion, equivalent to roughly 13.8% of global sales.[128]
While much has been written of the economic advantages of Internet-enabled commerce, there is also evidence that some aspects of the Internet such as maps and location-aware services may serve to reinforce economic inequality and the digital divide.[129] Electronic commerce may be responsible for consolidation and the decline of mom-and-pop, brick and mortar businesses resulting in increases in income inequality.[130][131][132]
Author Andrew Keen, a long-time critic of the social transformations caused by the Internet, has focused on the economic effects of consolidation from Internet businesses. Keen cites a 2013 Institute for Local Self-Reliance report saying brick-and-mortar retailers employ 47 people for every $10 million in sales while Amazon employs only 14. Similarly, the 700-employee room rental start-up Airbnb was valued at $10 billion in 2014, about half as much as Hilton Worldwide, which employs 152,000 people. At that time, Uber employed 1,000 full-time employees and was valued at $18.2 billion, about the same valuation as Avis Rent a Car and The Hertz Corporation combined, which together employed almost 60,000 people.[133]
Remote work is facilitated by tools such as groupware, virtual private networks, conference calling, videotelephony, and VoIP so that work may be performed from any location, most conveniently the worker's home. It can be efficient and useful for companies as it allows workers to communicate over long distances, saving significant amounts of travel time and cost. More workers have adequate bandwidth at home to use these tools to link their home to their corporate intranet and internal communication networks.
Wikis have also been used in the academic community for sharing and dissemination of information across institutional and international boundaries.[134] In those settings, they have been found useful for collaboration on grant writing, strategic planning, departmental documentation, and committee work.[135] The United States Patent and Trademark Office uses a wiki to allow the public to collaborate on finding prior art relevant to examination of pending patent applications. Queens, New York has used a wiki to allow citizens to collaborate on the design and planning of a local park.[136] The English Wikipedia has the largest user base among wikis on the World Wide Web[137] and ranks in the top 10 among all Web sites in terms of traffic.[138]
United States Patent and Trademark Office
This section needs expansion with: E-government. You can help by adding to it.  (July 2021)
The webpage contains an image of a [icon] here.
The Internet has achieved new relevance as a political tool. The presidential campaign of Howard Dean in 2004 in the United States was notable for its success in soliciting donation via the Internet. Many political groups use the Internet to achieve a new method of organizing for carrying out their mission, having given rise to Internet activism, most notably practiced by rebels in the Arab Spring.[139][140] The New York Times suggested that social media websites, such as Facebook and Twitter, helped people organize the political revolutions in Egypt, by helping activists organize protests, communicate grievances, and disseminate information.[141]
Many have understood the Internet as an extension of the Habermasian notion of the public sphere, observing how network communication technologies provide something like a global civic forum. However, incidents of politically motivated Internet censorship have now been recorded in many countries, including western democracies.[142][143]
The spread of low-cost Internet access in developing countries has opened up new possibilities for peer-to-peer charities, which allow individuals to contribute small amounts to charitable projects for other individuals. Websites, such as DonorsChoose and GlobalGiving, allow small-scale donors to direct funds to individual projects of their choice. A popular twist on Internet-based philanthropy is the use of peer-to-peer lending for charitable purposes. Kiva pioneered this concept in 2005, offering the first web-based service to publish individual loan profiles for funding. Kiva raises funds for local intermediary microfinance organizations that post stories and updates on behalf of the borrowers. Lenders can contribute as little as $25 to loans of their choice, and receive their money back as borrowers repay. Kiva falls short of being a pure peer-to-peer charity, in that loans are disbursed before being funded by lenders and borrowers do not communicate with lenders themselves.[144][145]
Internet resources, hardware, and software components are the target of criminal or malicious attempts to gain unauthorized control to cause interruptions, commit fraud, engage in blackmail or access private information.
Malware is malicious software used and distributed via the Internet. It includes computer viruses which are copied with the help of humans, computer worms which copy themselves automatically, software for denial of service attacks, ransomware, botnets, and spyware that reports on the activity and typing of users. Usually, these activities constitute cybercrime. Defense theorists have also speculated about the possibilities of hackers using cyber warfare using similar methods on a large scale.[146]
The vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of data and traffic on the Internet.[147] In the United States for example, under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all phone calls and broadband Internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc.) are required to be available for unimpeded real-time monitoring by Federal law enforcement agencies.[148][149][150] Packet capture is the monitoring of data traffic on a computer network. Computers communicate over the Internet by breaking up messages (emails, images, videos, web pages, files, etc.) into small chunks called "packets", which are routed through a network of computers, until they reach their destination, where they are assembled back into a complete "message" again. Packet Capture Appliance intercepts these packets as they are traveling through the network, in order to examine their contents using other programs. A packet capture is an information gathering tool, but not an analysis tool. That is it gathers "messages" but it does not analyze them and figure out what they mean. Other programs are needed to perform traffic analysis and sift through intercepted data looking for important/useful information. Under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act all U.S. telecommunications providers are required to install packet sniffing technology to allow Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies to intercept all of their customers' broadband Internet and VoIP traffic.[151]
Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act
The large amount of data gathered from packet capturing requires surveillance software that filters and reports relevant information, such as the use of certain words or phrases, the access of certain types of web sites, or communicating via email or chat with certain parties.[152] Agencies, such as the Information Awareness Office, NSA, GCHQ and the FBI, spend billions of dollars per year to develop, purchase, implement, and operate systems for interception and analysis of data.[153] Similar systems are operated by Iranian secret police to identify and suppress dissidents. The required hardware and software was allegedly installed by German Siemens AG and Finnish Nokia.[154]
Internet censorship and surveillance by country
Pervasive   Substantial     Selective   Little or none    Unclassified / No data
Pervasive   Substantial     Selective   Little or none
Some governments, such as those of Burma, Iran, North Korea, Mainland China, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, restrict access to content on the Internet within their territories, especially to political and religious content, with domain name and keyword filters.[160]
In Norway, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden, major Internet service providers have voluntarily agreed to restrict access to sites listed by authorities. While this list of forbidden resources is supposed to contain only known child pornography sites, the content of the list is secret.[161] Many countries, including the United States, have enacted laws against the possession or distribution of certain material, such as child pornography, via the Internet, but do not mandate filter software. Many free or commercially available software programs, called content-control software are available to users to block offensive websites on individual computers or networks, in order to limit access by children to pornographic material or depiction of violence.
As the Internet is a heterogeneous network, the physical characteristics, including for example the data transfer rates of connections, vary widely. It exhibits emergent phenomena that depend on its large-scale organization.[162]
Graphs are temporarily unavailable due to technical issues.
The volume of Internet traffic is difficult to measure because no single point of measurement exists in the multi-tiered, non-hierarchical topology. Traffic data may be estimated from the aggregate volume through the peering points of the Tier 1 network providers, but traffic that stays local in large provider networks may not be accounted for.
An Internet blackout or outage can be caused by local signaling interruptions. Disruptions of submarine communications cables may cause blackouts or slowdowns to large areas, such as in the 2008 submarine cable disruption. Less-developed countries are more vulnerable due to a small number of high-capacity links. Land cables are also vulnerable, as in 2011 when a woman digging for scrap metal severed most connectivity for the nation of Armenia.[163] Internet blackouts affecting almost entire countries can be achieved by governments as a form of Internet censorship, as in the blockage of the Internet in Egypt, whereby approximately 93%[164] of networks were without access in 2011 in an attempt to stop mobilization for anti-government protests.[165]
Estimates of the Internet's electricity usage have been the subject of controversy, according to a 2014 peer-reviewed research paper that found claims differing by a factor of 20,000 published in the literature during the preceding decade, ranging from 0.0064 kilowatt hours per gigabyte transferred (kWh/GB) to 136 kWh/GB.[166] The researchers attributed these discrepancies mainly to the year of reference (i.e. whether efficiency gains over time had been taken into account) and to whether "end devices such as personal computers and servers are included" in the analysis.[166]
In 2011, academic researchers estimated the overall energy used by the Internet to be between 170 and 307 GW, less than two percent of the energy used by humanity. This estimate included the energy needed to build, operate, and periodically replace the estimated 750 million laptops, a billion smart phones and 100 million servers worldwide as well as the energy that routers, cell towers, optical switches, Wi-Fi transmitters and cloud storage devices use when transmitting Internet traffic.[167][168] According to a non-peer reviewed study published in 2018 by The Shift Project (a French think tank funded by corporate sponsors), nearly 4% of global CO2 emissions could be attributed to global data transfer and the necessary infrastructure.[169] The study also said that online video streaming alone accounted for 60% of this data transfer and therefore contributed to over 300 million tons of CO2 emission per year, and argued for new "digital sobriety" regulations restricting the use and size of video files.[170]
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Internet portal
	Bullet Point 2: World portal
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Crowdfunding
	Bullet Point 2: Crowdsourcing
	Bullet Point 3: Darknet
	Bullet Point 4: Deep web
	Bullet Point 5: Freenet
	Bullet Point 6: Internet industry jargon
	Bullet Point 7: Index of Internet-related articles
	Bullet Point 8: Internet metaphors
	Bullet Point 9: Internet video
	Bullet Point 10: "Internets"
	Bullet Point 11: Open Systems Interconnection
	Bullet Point 12: Outline of the Internet
Ordered List:
	Element 1: ^ See Capitalization of Internet.

	Element 2: ^ Despite the name, TCP/IP also includes UDP traffic, which is significant.[1]

^ Despite the name, TCP/IP also includes UDP traffic, which is significant.[1]
Despite the name, TCP/IP also includes UDP traffic, which is significant.[1]
Ordered List:
	Element 1: ^ Amogh Dhamdhere. "Internet Traffic Characterization". Retrieved 6 May 2022.

	Element 2: ^ Jump up to: a b "A Flaw in the Design". The Washington Post. 30 May 2015. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2020. The Internet was born of a big idea: Messages could be chopped into chunks, sent through a network in a series of transmissions, then reassembled by destination computers quickly and efficiently. Historians credit seminal insights to Welsh scientist Donald W. Davies and American engineer Paul Baran. ... The most important institutional force ... was the Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) ... as ARPA began work on a groundbreaking computer network, the agency recruited scientists affiliated with the nation's top universities.

	Element 3: ^ Stewart, Bill (January 2000). "Internet History – One Page Summary". The Living Internet. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014.

	Element 4: ^ "#3 1982: the ARPANET community grows" in 40 maps that explain the internet Archived 6 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Timothy B. Lee, Vox Conversations, 2 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

	Element 5: ^ Strickland, Jonathan (3 March 2008). "How Stuff Works: Who owns the Internet?". Archived from the original on 19 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

	Element 6: ^ Hoffman, P.; Harris, S. (September 2006). The Tao of IETF: A Novice's Guide to Internet Engineering Task Force. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC4677. RFC 4677.

	Element 7: ^ "New Seven Wonders panel". USA Today. 27 October 2006. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010.

	Element 8: ^ "Internetted". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) nineteenth-century use as an adjective.

	Element 9: ^ "United States Army Field Manual FM 24-6 Radio Operator's Manual Army Ground Forces June 1945". United States War Department.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

	Element 10: ^ Jump up to: a b Cerf, Vint; Dalal, Yogen; Sunshine, Carl (December 1974). Specification of Internet Transmission Control Protocol. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0675. RFC 675.

	Element 11: ^ Jump up to: a b c d Corbett, Philip B. (1 June 2016). "It's Official: The 'Internet' Is Over". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.

	Element 12: ^ Jump up to: a b Herring, Susan C. (19 October 2015). "Should You Be Capitalizing the Word 'Internet'?". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.

	Element 13: ^ Coren, Michael J. (2 June 2016). "One of the internet's inventors thinks it should still be capitalized". Quartz. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020.

	Element 14: ^ "World Wide Web Timeline". Pews Research Center. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2015.

	Element 15: ^ "HTML 4.01 Specification". World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008. [T]he link (or hyperlink, or Web link) [is] the basic hypertext construct. A link is a connection from one Web resource to another. Although a simple concept, the link has been one of the primary forces driving the success of the Web.

	Element 16: ^ Hauben, Michael; Hauben, Ronda (1997). "5 The Vision of Interactive Computing And the Future". Netizens: On the History and Impact of Usenet and the Internet (PDF). Wiley. ISBN 978-0-8186-7706-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2020.

	Element 17: ^ Zelnick, Bob; Zelnick, Eva (1 September 2013). The Illusion of Net Neutrality: Political Alarmism, Regulatory Creep and the Real Threat to Internet Freedom. Hoover Press. ISBN 978-0-8179-1596-4. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2020.

	Element 18: ^ Peter, Ian (2004). "So, who really did invent the Internet?". The Internet History Project. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

	Element 19: ^ "Inductee Details - Paul Baran". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017; "Inductee Details - Donald Watts Davies". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.

	Element 20: ^ Kim, Byung-Keun (2005). Internationalising the Internet the Co-evolution of Influence and Technology. Edward Elgar. pp. 51–55. ISBN 978-1-84542-675-0.

	Element 21: ^ Gromov, Gregory (1995). "Roads and Crossroads of Internet History". Archived from the original on 27 January 2016.

	Element 22: ^ Hafner, Katie (1998). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83267-8.

	Element 23: ^ Hauben, Ronda (2001). "From the ARPANET to the Internet". Archived from the original on 21 July 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009.

	Element 24: ^ "Internet Pioneers Discuss the Future of Money, Books, and Paper in 1972". Paleofuture. 23 July 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020.

	Element 25: ^ Townsend, Anthony (2001). "The Internet and the Rise of the New Network Cities, 1969–1999". Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design. 28 (1): 39–58. doi:10.1068/b2688. ISSN 0265-8135. S2CID 11574572.

	Element 26: ^ "NORSAR and the Internet". NORSAR. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013.

	Element 27: ^ Kirstein, P.T. (1999). "Early experiences with the Arpanet and Internet in the United Kingdom" (PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 21 (1): 38–44. doi:10.1109/85.759368. ISSN 1934-1547. S2CID 1558618. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2020.

	Element 28: ^ Leiner, Barry M. "Brief History of the Internet: The Initial Internetting Concepts". Internet Society. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2014.

	Element 29: ^ Cerf, V.; Kahn, R. (1974). "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication" (PDF). IEEE Transactions on Communications. 22 (5): 637–648. doi:10.1109/TCOM.1974.1092259. ISSN 1558-0857. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 September 2006. The authors wish to thank a number of colleagues for helpful comments during early discussions of international network protocols, especially R. Metcalfe, R. Scantlebury, D. Walden, and H. Zimmerman; D. Davies and L. Pouzin who constructively commented on the fragmentation and accounting issues; and S. Crocker who commented on the creation and destruction of associations.

	Element 30: ^ "The internet's fifth man". The Economist. 30 November 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 19 April 2020. Retrieved 22 April 2020. In the early 1970s Mr Pouzin created an innovative data network that linked locations in France, Italy and Britain. Its simplicity and efficiency pointed the way to a network that could connect not just dozens of machines, but millions of them. It captured the imagination of Dr Cerf and Dr Kahn, who included aspects of its design in the protocols that now power the internet.

	Element 31: ^ Schatt, Stan (1991). Linking LANs: A Micro Manager's Guide. McGraw-Hill. p. 200. ISBN 0-8306-3755-9.

	Element 32: ^ Frazer, Karen D. (1995). "NSFNET: A Partnership for High-Speed Networking, Final Report 1987–1995" (PDF). Merit Network, Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2015.

	Element 33: ^ Ben Segal (1995). "A Short History of Internet Protocols at CERN". Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2011.

	Element 34: ^ Réseaux IP Européens (RIPE)

	Element 35: ^ "Internet History in Asia". 16th APAN Meetings/Advanced Network Conference in Busan. Archived from the original on 1 February 2006. Retrieved 25 December 2005.

	Element 36: ^ "The History of NORDUnet" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

	Element 37: ^ Clarke, Roger. "Origins and Nature of the Internet in Australia". Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 21 January 2014.

	Element 38: ^ Zakon, Robert (November 1997). RFC 2235. IETF. p. 8. doi:10.17487/RFC2235. Retrieved 2 December 2020.

	Element 39: ^ "InfoWorld". 25 September 1989. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017 – via Google Books.

	Element 40: ^ "INTERNET MONTHLY REPORTS". February 1990. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 28 November 2020.

	Element 41: ^ Berners-Lee, Tim. "The Original HTTP as defined in 1991". W3C.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 1997.

	Element 42: ^ "The website of the world's first-ever web server". info.cern.ch. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010.

	Element 43: ^ "Stanford Federal Credit Union Pioneers Online Financial Services" (Press release). 21 June 1995. Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.

	Element 44: ^ "History - About us - OP Group". Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.

	Element 45: ^ Harris, Susan R.; Gerich, Elise (April 1996). "Retiring the NSFNET Backbone Service: Chronicling the End of an Era". ConneXions. 10 (4). Archived from the original on 17 August 2013.

	Element 46: ^ "Measuring digital development: Facts and figures 2021". Telecommunication Development Bureau, International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 16 November 2022.

	Element 47: ^ "Total Midyear Population for the World: 1950-2050"". International Programs Center for Demographic and Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2020.

	Element 48: ^ Jindal, R. P. (2009). "From millibits to terabits per second and beyond - Over 60 years of innovation". 2009 2nd International Workshop on Electron Devices and Semiconductor Technology: 1–6. doi:10.1109/EDST.2009.5166093. ISBN 978-1-4244-3831-0. S2CID 25112828. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019.

	Element 49: ^ Ward, Mark (3 August 2006). "How the web went world wide". Technology Correspondent. BBC News. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 24 January 2011.

	Element 50: ^ "Brazil, Russia, India and China to Lead Internet Growth Through 2011". Clickz.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2008. Retrieved 28 May 2009.

	Element 51: ^ Coffman, K.G; Odlyzko, A.M. (2 October 1998). "The size and growth rate of the Internet" (PDF). AT&T Labs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 21 May 2007.

	Element 52: ^ Comer, Douglas (2006). The Internet book. Prentice Hall. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-13-233553-9.

	Element 53: ^ "World Internet Users and Population Stats". Internet World Stats. Miniwatts Marketing Group. 22 June 2011. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2011.

	Element 54: ^ Hilbert, Martin; López, Priscila (April 2011). "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information". Science. 332 (6025): 60–65. Bibcode:2011Sci...332...60H. doi:10.1126/science.1200970. PMID 21310967. S2CID 206531385. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2011.

	Element 55: ^ Klein, Hans (2004). "ICANN and Non-Territorial Sovereignty: Government Without the Nation State". Internet and Public Policy Project. Georgia Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013.

	Element 56: ^ Packard, Ashley (2010). Digital Media Law. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-4051-8169-3.

	Element 57: ^ McCarthy, Kieren (1 July 2005). "Bush administration annexes internet". The Register. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011.

	Element 58: ^ Mueller, Milton L. (2010). Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance. MIT Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-262-01459-5.

	Element 59: ^ "ICG Applauds Transfer of IANA Stewardship". IANA Stewardship Transition Coordination Group (ICG). Archived from the original on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2017.

	Element 60: ^ "Internet Society (ISOC) All About The Internet: History of the Internet". ISOC. Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2013.

	Element 61: ^ Pasternak, Sean B. (7 March 2006). "Toronto Hydro to Install Wireless Network in Downtown Toronto". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 10 April 2006. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

	Element 62: ^ "Mobile and Tablet Internet Usage Exceeds Desktop for First Time Worldwide". StatCounter: Global Stats, Press Release. 1 November 2016. Archived from the original on 1 November 2016. StatCounter Global Stats finds that mobile and tablet devices accounted for 51.3% of Internet usage worldwide in October compared to 48.7% by desktop.

	Element 63: ^ "World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2020 (24th Edition/July 2020)". International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2017a. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates). World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators database

	Element 64: ^ Jump up to: a b World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018 (PDF). UNESCO. 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018.

	Element 65: ^ Jump up to: a b "GSMA The Mobile Economy 2019 - The Mobile Economy". 11 March 2019. Archived from the original on 11 March 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.

	Element 66: ^ Galpaya, Helani (12 April 2019). "Zero-rating in Emerging Economies" (PDF). Global Commission on Internet Governance. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.

	Element 67: ^ "Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI). 2015. Models of Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries. Research brief. The Impacts of Emerging Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries".[dead link]

	Element 68: ^ Alison GillwAld, ChenAi ChAir, Ariel Futter, KweKu KorAntenG, FolA oduFuwA, John wAlubenGo (12 September 2016). "Much Ado About Nothing? Zero Rating in the African Context" (PDF). Researchictafrica. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

	Element 69: ^ Jump up to: a b J. Postel, ed. (September 1981). Internet Protocol, DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0791. RFC 791. Updated by RFC 1349, 2474, 6864

	Element 70: ^ Huston, Geoff. "IPv4 Address Report, daily generated". Archived from the original on 1 April 2009. Retrieved 20 May 2009.

	Element 71: ^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1995). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC1883. RFC 1883.

	Element 72: ^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1998). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC2460. RFC 2460.

	Element 73: ^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (July 2017). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC8200. RFC 8200.

	Element 74: ^ "Notice of Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) Address Depletion" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 7 August 2009.

	Element 75: ^ Jeffrey Mogul; Jon Postel (August 1985). Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0950. RFC 950. Updated by RFC 6918.

	Element 76: ^ Fisher, Tim. "How to Find Your Default Gateway IP Address". Lifewire. Archived from the original on 25 February 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019.

	Element 77: ^ "Default Gateway". techopedia.com. 30 June 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020.

	Element 78: ^ "IETF Home Page". Ietf.org. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009.

	Element 79: ^ "The Difference Between the Internet and the World Wide Web". Webopedia.com. QuinStreet Inc. 24 June 2010. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014.

	Element 80: ^ "IAB Internet advertising revenue report: 2012 full year results" (PDF). PricewaterhouseCoopers, Internet Advertising Bureau. April 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2013.

	Element 81: ^ Brown, Ron (26 October 1972). "Fax invades the mail market". New Scientist. 56 (817): 218–221.

	Element 82: ^ Luckett, Herbert P. (March 1973). "What's News: Electronic-mail delivery gets started". Popular Science. 202 (3): 85.

	Element 83: ^ Booth, C (2010). "Chapter 2: IP Phones, Software VoIP, and Integrated and Mobile VoIP". Library Technology Reports. 46 (5): 11–19.

	Element 84: ^ Morrison, Geoff (18 November 2010). "What to know before buying a 'connected' TV – Technology & science – Tech and gadgets – Tech Holiday Guide". NBC News. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

	Element 85: ^ "Press - YouTube". www.youtube.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2020.

	Element 86: ^ "YouTube now defaults to HTML5". YouTube Engineering and Developers Blog. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018.

	Element 87: ^ Carlson, Kathie; Flanagin, Michael N.; Martin, Kathleen; Martin, Mary E.; Mendelsohn, John; Rodgers, Priscilla Young; Ronnberg, Ami; Salman, Sherry; Wesley, Deborah A.;  et al. (Authors) (2010).  Arm, Karen; Ueda, Kako; Thulin, Anne; Langerak, Allison; Kiley, Timothy Gus; Wolff, Mary (eds.). The Book of Symbols: Reflections on Archetypal Images. Köln: Taschen. p. 518. ISBN 978-3-8365-1448-4.

	Element 88: ^ Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (2 October 2017). "Technology Adoption". Our World in Data. Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019.

	Element 89: ^ "Individuals using the Internet 2005 to 2014" Archived 28 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.

	Element 90: ^ "Internet users per 100 inhabitants 1997 to 2007" Archived 17 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, ICT Data and Statistics (IDS), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.

	Element 91: ^ Internet users graphs Archived 9 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Market Information and Statistics, International Telecommunication Union

	Element 92: ^ "Google Earth demonstrates how technology benefits RI's civil society, govt". Antara News. 26 May 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012. Retrieved 19 November 2012.

	Element 93: ^ Steve Dent. "There are now 3 billion Internet users, mostly in rich countries". Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014.

	Element 94: ^ "Statistical Report on Internet Development in China" (PDF). Cnnic.com. January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019.

	Element 95: ^ "World Internet Users Statistics and 2019 World Population Stats". internetworldstats.com. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2019.

	Element 96: ^ "Digital 2020: 3.8 billion people use social media". 30 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2020.

	Element 97: ^ "Internet". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 19 March 2021.

	Element 98: ^ Jump up to: a b "Number of Internet Users by Language". Internet World Stats, Miniwatts Marketing Group. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2012.

	Element 99: ^ "World Internet Usage Statistics News and Population Stats". 30 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 March 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2011.

	Element 100: ^ How men and women use the Internet Pew Research Center 28 December 2005

	Element 101: ^ "Rapleaf Study on Social Network Users". Archived from the original on 20 March 2009.

	Element 102: ^ "Women Ahead of Men in Online Tv, Dvr, Games, And Social Media". Entrepreneur.com. 1 May 2008. Archived from the original on 16 September 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

	Element 103: ^ "Technorati's State of the Blogosphere". Technorati. Archived from the original on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2011.

	Element 104: ^ Jump up to: a b "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000–2012" Archived 9 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine, International Telecommunication Union (Geneva), June 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2013.

	Element 105: ^ Seese, Michael (2009). Scrappy Information Security. p. 130. ISBN 978-1-60005-132-6. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2015.

	Element 106: ^ netizen Archived 21 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Dictionary.com

	Element 107: ^ Hauben, Michael. "The Net and Netizens". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.

	Element 108: ^ "A Brief History of the Internet". the Internet Society. Archived from the original on 4 June 2007.

	Element 109: ^ "Oxford Dictionaries – internaut". oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2015.

	Element 110: ^ Mossberger, Karen; Tolbert, Caroline J.; McNeal, Ramona S. (23 November 2011). Digital Citizenship – The Internet, Society and Participation. ISBN 978-0-8194-5606-9.

	Element 111: ^ "Usage of content languages for websites". W3Techs.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2013.

	Element 112: ^ "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.

	Element 113: ^ "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.

	Element 114: ^ Reips, U.-D. (2008). "How Internet-mediated research changes science". Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 268–294. ISBN 9780521694643. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014.

	Element 115: ^ "The Virtual Private Nightmare: VPN". Librenix. 4 August 2004. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2010.

	Element 116: ^ Dariusz Jemielniak; Aleksandra Przegalinska (18 February 2020). Collaborative Society. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-35645-9. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.

	Element 117: ^ Moore, Keith (27 July 2013). "Twitter 'report abuse' button calls after rape threats". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.

	Element 118: ^ Kessler, Sarah (11 October 2010). "5 Fun and Safe Social Networks for Children". Mashable. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.

	Element 119: ^ Jump up to: a b "Communication in our life". StudFiles (in Russian). Retrieved 16 May 2023.

	Element 120: ^ Goldman, Russell (22 January 2008). "Do It Yourself! Amateur Porn Stars Make Bank". ABC News. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011.

	Element 121: ^ Spohn, Dave (15 December 2009). "Top Online Game Trends of the Decade". About.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011.

	Element 122: ^ Spohn, Dave (2 June 2011). "Internet Game Timeline: 1963 – 2004". About.com. Archived from the original on 25 April 2006.

	Element 123: ^ Carole Hughes; Boston College. "The Relationship Between Internet Use and Loneliness Among College Students". Boston College. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2011.

	Element 124: ^ Barker, Eric (2017). Barking Up the Wrong Tree. HarperCollins. pp. 235–6. ISBN 9780062416049.

	Element 125: ^ Thornton, Patricia M. (2003). "The New Cybersects: Resistance and Repression in the Reform era".  In Perry, Elizabeth; Selden, Mark (eds.). Chinese Society: Change, Conflict and Resistance (2 ed.). London and New York: Routledge. pp. 149–150. ISBN 9780415560740.

	Element 126: ^ "Net abuse hits small city firms". The Scotsman. Edinburgh. 11 September 2003. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2009.

	Element 127: ^ Carr, Nicholas G. (7 June 2010). The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. W.W. Norton. p. 276. ISBN 978-0393072228.

	Element 128: ^ "The New Digital Economy: How it will transform business" (PDF). Oxford Economics. 2 July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2014.

	Element 129: ^ Badger, Emily (6 February 2013). "How the Internet Reinforces Inequality in the Real World". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2013.

	Element 130: ^ "E-commerce will make the shopping mall a retail wasteland". ZDNet. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013.

	Element 131: ^ "'Free Shipping Day' Promotion Spurs Late-Season Online Spending Surge, Improving Season-to-Date Growth Rate to 16 Percent vs. Year Ago". Comscore. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013.

	Element 132: ^ "The Death of the American Shopping Mall". The Atlantic – Cities. 26 December 2012. Archived from the original on 15 February 2013.

	Element 133: ^ Harris, Michael (2 January 2015). "Book review: 'The Internet Is Not the Answer' by Andrew Keen". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 20 January 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2015.

	Element 134: ^ MM Wanderley; D Birnbaum; J Malloch (2006). New Interfaces For Musical Expression. IRCAM – Centre Pompidou. p. 180. ISBN 978-2-84426-314-8.

	Element 135: ^ Nancy T. Lombardo (June 2008). "Putting Wikis to Work in Libraries". Medical Reference Services Quarterly. 27 (2): 129–145. doi:10.1080/02763860802114223. PMID 18844087. S2CID 11552140.

	Element 136: ^ Noveck, Beth Simone (March 2007). "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". Journal of Legal Education. 57 (1). Archived from the original on 3 July 2014.(subscription required)

	Element 137: ^ "WikiStats by S23". S23Wiki. 3 April 2008. Archived from the original on 25 August 2014. Retrieved 7 April 2007.

	Element 138: ^ "Alexa Web Search – Top 500". Alexa Internet. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015.

	Element 139: ^ "The Arab Uprising's Cascading Effects". Miller-mccune.com. 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 February 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011.

	Element 140: ^ "The Role of the Internet in Democratic Transition: Case Study of the Arab Spring" (PDF). 5 July 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2012., Davit Chokoshvili, Master's Thesis, June 2011

	Element 141: ^ Kirkpatrick, David D. (9 February 2011). "Wired and Shrewd, Young Egyptians Guide Revolt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.

	Element 142: ^ Ronald Deibert; John Palfrey; Rafal Rohozinski; Jonathan Zittrain (25 January 2008). Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-29072-2.

	Element 143: ^ Larry Diamond; Marc F. Plattner (30 July 2012). Liberation Technology: Social Media and the Struggle for Democracy. JHU Press. ISBN 978-1-4214-0568-1.

	Element 144: ^ Roodman, David (2 October 2009). "Kiva Is Not Quite What It Seems". Center for Global Development. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010. Retrieved 16 January 2010.

	Element 145: ^ Strom, Stephanie (9 November 2009). "Confusion on Where Money Lent via Kiva Goes". The New York Times. p. 6. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.

	Element 146: ^ Andriole, Steve. "Cyberwarfare Will Explode In 2020 (Because It's Cheap, Easy And Effective)". Forbes. Retrieved 18 May 2021.

	Element 147: ^ Diffie, Whitfield; Susan Landau (August 2008). "Internet Eavesdropping: A Brave New World of Wiretapping". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 13 November 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2009.

	Element 148: ^ "CALEA Archive". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 25 October 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2009.

	Element 149: ^ "CALEA: The Perils of Wiretapping the Internet". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 16 March 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.

	Element 150: ^ "CALEA: Frequently Asked Questions". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 1 May 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.

	Element 151: ^ "American Council on Education vs. FCC, Decision, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" (PDF). 9 June 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2013.

	Element 152: ^ Hill, Michael (11 October 2004). "Government funds chat room surveillance research". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 11 May 2010. Retrieved 19 March 2009.

	Element 153: ^ McCullagh, Declan (30 January 2007). "FBI turns to broad new wiretap method". ZDNet News. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 13 March 2009.

	Element 154: ^ "First round in Internet war goes to Iranian intelligence". Debkafile. 28 June 2009. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013.

	Element 155: ^ "Freedom on the Net 2018" (PDF). Freedom House. November 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018.

	Element 156: ^ OpenNet Initiative "Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet" Archived 10 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 8 November 2011 and "Country Profiles" Archived 26 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, the OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative partnership of the Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto; the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University; and the SecDev Group, Ottawa

	Element 157: ^ Due to legal concerns the OpenNet Initiative does not check for filtering of child pornography and because their classifications focus on technical filtering, they do not include other types of censorship.

	Element 158: ^ "Enemies of the Internet 2014: Entities at the heart of censorship and surveillance". Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014.

	Element 159: ^ "Internet Enemies" (PDF). Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 12 March 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2017.

	Element 160: ^ Deibert, Ronald J.; Palfrey, John G.; Rohozinski, Rafal; Zittrain, Jonathan (April 2010). Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262514354. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.

	Element 161: ^ "Finland censors anti-censorship site". The Register. 18 February 2008. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 19 February 2008.

	Element 162: ^ Albert, Réka; Jeong, Hawoong; Barabási, Albert-László (9 September 1999). "Diameter of the World-Wide Web". Nature. 401 (6749): 130–131. arXiv:cond-mat/9907038. Bibcode:1999Natur.401..130A. doi:10.1038/43601. S2CID 4419938.

	Element 163: ^ "Georgian woman cuts off web access to whole of Armenia". The Guardian. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 25 August 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2012.

	Element 164: ^ Cowie, James. "Egypt Leaves the Internet". Renesys. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2011.

	Element 165: ^ "Egypt severs internet connection amid growing unrest". BBC News. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012.

	Element 166: ^ Jump up to: a b Coroama, Vlad C.; Hilty, Lorenz M. (February 2014). "Assessing Internet energy intensity: A review of methods and results" (PDF). Environmental Impact Assessment Review. 45: 63–68. doi:10.1016/j.eiar.2013.12.004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020.

	Element 167: ^ Giles, Jim (26 October 2011). "Internet responsible for 2 per cent of global energy usage". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014.,

	Element 168: ^ Raghavan, Barath; Ma, Justin (14 November 2011). "The Energy and Emergy of the Internet" (PDF). Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks. Cambridge, MA.: ACM SIGCOMM: 1–6. doi:10.1145/2070562.2070571. ISBN 9781450310598. S2CID 6125953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2014.

	Element 169: ^ Cwienk, Jeannette (11 July 2019). "Is Netflix bad for the environment? How streaming video contributes to climate change | DW | 11.07.2019". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.

	Element 170: ^ ""Climate crisis: The Unsustainable Use of Online Video" : Our new report". The Shift Project. 10 July 2019. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.

^ Amogh Dhamdhere. "Internet Traffic Characterization". Retrieved 6 May 2022.
Amogh Dhamdhere. "Internet Traffic Characterization". Retrieved 6 May 2022.
^ Jump up to: a b "A Flaw in the Design". The Washington Post. 30 May 2015. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2020. The Internet was born of a big idea: Messages could be chopped into chunks, sent through a network in a series of transmissions, then reassembled by destination computers quickly and efficiently. Historians credit seminal insights to Welsh scientist Donald W. Davies and American engineer Paul Baran. ... The most important institutional force ... was the Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) ... as ARPA began work on a groundbreaking computer network, the agency recruited scientists affiliated with the nation's top universities.
"A Flaw in the Design". The Washington Post. 30 May 2015. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2020. The Internet was born of a big idea: Messages could be chopped into chunks, sent through a network in a series of transmissions, then reassembled by destination computers quickly and efficiently. Historians credit seminal insights to Welsh scientist Donald W. Davies and American engineer Paul Baran. ... The most important institutional force ... was the Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) ... as ARPA began work on a groundbreaking computer network, the agency recruited scientists affiliated with the nation's top universities.
The Internet was born of a big idea: Messages could be chopped into chunks, sent through a network in a series of transmissions, then reassembled by destination computers quickly and efficiently. Historians credit seminal insights to Welsh scientist Donald W. Davies and American engineer Paul Baran. ... The most important institutional force ... was the Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) ... as ARPA began work on a groundbreaking computer network, the agency recruited scientists affiliated with the nation's top universities.
^ Stewart, Bill (January 2000). "Internet History – One Page Summary". The Living Internet. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014.
Stewart, Bill (January 2000). "Internet History – One Page Summary". The Living Internet. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014.
^ "#3 1982: the ARPANET community grows" in 40 maps that explain the internet Archived 6 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Timothy B. Lee, Vox Conversations, 2 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
"#3 1982: the ARPANET community grows" in 40 maps that explain the internet Archived 6 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Timothy B. Lee, Vox Conversations, 2 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
^ Strickland, Jonathan (3 March 2008). "How Stuff Works: Who owns the Internet?". Archived from the original on 19 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
Strickland, Jonathan (3 March 2008). "How Stuff Works: Who owns the Internet?". Archived from the original on 19 June 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
"How Stuff Works: Who owns the Internet?"
^ Hoffman, P.; Harris, S. (September 2006). The Tao of IETF: A Novice's Guide to Internet Engineering Task Force. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC4677. RFC 4677.
Hoffman, P.; Harris, S. (September 2006). The Tao of IETF: A Novice's Guide to Internet Engineering Task Force. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC4677. RFC 4677.
The Tao of IETF: A Novice's Guide to Internet Engineering Task Force
^ "New Seven Wonders panel". USA Today. 27 October 2006. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010.
"New Seven Wonders panel". USA Today. 27 October 2006. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010.
^ "Internetted". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) nineteenth-century use as an adjective.
"Internetted". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) nineteenth-century use as an adjective.
"Internetted". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press.
(Subscription or participating institution membership required.)
^ "United States Army Field Manual FM 24-6 Radio Operator's Manual Army Ground Forces June 1945". United States War Department.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
"United States Army Field Manual FM 24-6 Radio Operator's Manual Army Ground Forces June 1945". United States War Department.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
"United States Army Field Manual FM 24-6 Radio Operator's Manual Army Ground Forces June 1945". United States War Department.
"United States Army Field Manual FM 24-6 Radio Operator's Manual Army Ground Forces June 1945"
{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ Jump up to: a b Cerf, Vint; Dalal, Yogen; Sunshine, Carl (December 1974). Specification of Internet Transmission Control Protocol. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0675. RFC 675.
Cerf, Vint; Dalal, Yogen; Sunshine, Carl (December 1974). Specification of Internet Transmission Control Protocol. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0675. RFC 675.
Specification of Internet Transmission Control Protocol
^ Jump up to: a b c d Corbett, Philip B. (1 June 2016). "It's Official: The 'Internet' Is Over". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.
Corbett, Philip B. (1 June 2016). "It's Official: The 'Internet' Is Over". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.
^ Jump up to: a b Herring, Susan C. (19 October 2015). "Should You Be Capitalizing the Word 'Internet'?". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.
Herring, Susan C. (19 October 2015). "Should You Be Capitalizing the Word 'Internet'?". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020.
"Should You Be Capitalizing the Word 'Internet'?"
^ Coren, Michael J. (2 June 2016). "One of the internet's inventors thinks it should still be capitalized". Quartz. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020.
Coren, Michael J. (2 June 2016). "One of the internet's inventors thinks it should still be capitalized". Quartz. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020.
"One of the internet's inventors thinks it should still be capitalized"
^ "World Wide Web Timeline". Pews Research Center. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2015.
"World Wide Web Timeline". Pews Research Center. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2015.
^ "HTML 4.01 Specification". World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008. [T]he link (or hyperlink, or Web link) [is] the basic hypertext construct. A link is a connection from one Web resource to another. Although a simple concept, the link has been one of the primary forces driving the success of the Web.
"HTML 4.01 Specification". World Wide Web Consortium. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008. [T]he link (or hyperlink, or Web link) [is] the basic hypertext construct. A link is a connection from one Web resource to another. Although a simple concept, the link has been one of the primary forces driving the success of the Web.
[T]he link (or hyperlink, or Web link) [is] the basic hypertext construct. A link is a connection from one Web resource to another. Although a simple concept, the link has been one of the primary forces driving the success of the Web.
^ Hauben, Michael; Hauben, Ronda (1997). "5 The Vision of Interactive Computing And the Future". Netizens: On the History and Impact of Usenet and the Internet (PDF). Wiley. ISBN 978-0-8186-7706-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2020.
Hauben, Michael; Hauben, Ronda (1997). "5 The Vision of Interactive Computing And the Future". Netizens: On the History and Impact of Usenet and the Internet (PDF). Wiley. ISBN 978-0-8186-7706-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2020.
Netizens: On the History and Impact of Usenet and the Internet
^ Zelnick, Bob; Zelnick, Eva (1 September 2013). The Illusion of Net Neutrality: Political Alarmism, Regulatory Creep and the Real Threat to Internet Freedom. Hoover Press. ISBN 978-0-8179-1596-4. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2020.
Zelnick, Bob; Zelnick, Eva (1 September 2013). The Illusion of Net Neutrality: Political Alarmism, Regulatory Creep and the Real Threat to Internet Freedom. Hoover Press. ISBN 978-0-8179-1596-4. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2020.
The Illusion of Net Neutrality: Political Alarmism, Regulatory Creep and the Real Threat to Internet Freedom
^ Peter, Ian (2004). "So, who really did invent the Internet?". The Internet History Project. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
Peter, Ian (2004). "So, who really did invent the Internet?". The Internet History Project. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
"So, who really did invent the Internet?"
^ "Inductee Details - Paul Baran". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017; "Inductee Details - Donald Watts Davies". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
"Inductee Details - Paul Baran". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017; "Inductee Details - Donald Watts Davies". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
"Inductee Details - Paul Baran". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017
"Inductee Details - Donald Watts Davies". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
^ Kim, Byung-Keun (2005). Internationalising the Internet the Co-evolution of Influence and Technology. Edward Elgar. pp. 51–55. ISBN 978-1-84542-675-0.
Kim, Byung-Keun (2005). Internationalising the Internet the Co-evolution of Influence and Technology. Edward Elgar. pp. 51–55. ISBN 978-1-84542-675-0.
Internationalising the Internet the Co-evolution of Influence and Technology
^ Gromov, Gregory (1995). "Roads and Crossroads of Internet History". Archived from the original on 27 January 2016.
Gromov, Gregory (1995). "Roads and Crossroads of Internet History". Archived from the original on 27 January 2016.
"Roads and Crossroads of Internet History"
^ Hafner, Katie (1998). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83267-8.
Hafner, Katie (1998). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83267-8.
Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet
^ Hauben, Ronda (2001). "From the ARPANET to the Internet". Archived from the original on 21 July 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
Hauben, Ronda (2001). "From the ARPANET to the Internet". Archived from the original on 21 July 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
^ "Internet Pioneers Discuss the Future of Money, Books, and Paper in 1972". Paleofuture. 23 July 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020.
"Internet Pioneers Discuss the Future of Money, Books, and Paper in 1972". Paleofuture. 23 July 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020.
"Internet Pioneers Discuss the Future of Money, Books, and Paper in 1972"
^ Townsend, Anthony (2001). "The Internet and the Rise of the New Network Cities, 1969–1999". Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design. 28 (1): 39–58. doi:10.1068/b2688. ISSN 0265-8135. S2CID 11574572.
Townsend, Anthony (2001). "The Internet and the Rise of the New Network Cities, 1969–1999". Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design. 28 (1): 39–58. doi:10.1068/b2688. ISSN 0265-8135. S2CID 11574572.
"The Internet and the Rise of the New Network Cities, 1969–1999"
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design
^ "NORSAR and the Internet". NORSAR. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013.
"NORSAR and the Internet". NORSAR. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013.
^ Kirstein, P.T. (1999). "Early experiences with the Arpanet and Internet in the United Kingdom" (PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 21 (1): 38–44. doi:10.1109/85.759368. ISSN 1934-1547. S2CID 1558618. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2020.
Kirstein, P.T. (1999). "Early experiences with the Arpanet and Internet in the United Kingdom" (PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 21 (1): 38–44. doi:10.1109/85.759368. ISSN 1934-1547. S2CID 1558618. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2020.
"Early experiences with the Arpanet and Internet in the United Kingdom"
^ Leiner, Barry M. "Brief History of the Internet: The Initial Internetting Concepts". Internet Society. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
Leiner, Barry M. "Brief History of the Internet: The Initial Internetting Concepts". Internet Society. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2014.
"Brief History of the Internet: The Initial Internetting Concepts"
^ Cerf, V.; Kahn, R. (1974). "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication" (PDF). IEEE Transactions on Communications. 22 (5): 637–648. doi:10.1109/TCOM.1974.1092259. ISSN 1558-0857. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 September 2006. The authors wish to thank a number of colleagues for helpful comments during early discussions of international network protocols, especially R. Metcalfe, R. Scantlebury, D. Walden, and H. Zimmerman; D. Davies and L. Pouzin who constructively commented on the fragmentation and accounting issues; and S. Crocker who commented on the creation and destruction of associations.
Cerf, V.; Kahn, R. (1974). "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication" (PDF). IEEE Transactions on Communications. 22 (5): 637–648. doi:10.1109/TCOM.1974.1092259. ISSN 1558-0857. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 September 2006. The authors wish to thank a number of colleagues for helpful comments during early discussions of international network protocols, especially R. Metcalfe, R. Scantlebury, D. Walden, and H. Zimmerman; D. Davies and L. Pouzin who constructively commented on the fragmentation and accounting issues; and S. Crocker who commented on the creation and destruction of associations.
"A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication"
The authors wish to thank a number of colleagues for helpful comments during early discussions of international network protocols, especially R. Metcalfe, R. Scantlebury, D. Walden, and H. Zimmerman; D. Davies and L. Pouzin who constructively commented on the fragmentation and accounting issues; and S. Crocker who commented on the creation and destruction of associations.
^ "The internet's fifth man". The Economist. 30 November 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 19 April 2020. Retrieved 22 April 2020. In the early 1970s Mr Pouzin created an innovative data network that linked locations in France, Italy and Britain. Its simplicity and efficiency pointed the way to a network that could connect not just dozens of machines, but millions of them. It captured the imagination of Dr Cerf and Dr Kahn, who included aspects of its design in the protocols that now power the internet.
"The internet's fifth man". The Economist. 30 November 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 19 April 2020. Retrieved 22 April 2020. In the early 1970s Mr Pouzin created an innovative data network that linked locations in France, Italy and Britain. Its simplicity and efficiency pointed the way to a network that could connect not just dozens of machines, but millions of them. It captured the imagination of Dr Cerf and Dr Kahn, who included aspects of its design in the protocols that now power the internet.
In the early 1970s Mr Pouzin created an innovative data network that linked locations in France, Italy and Britain. Its simplicity and efficiency pointed the way to a network that could connect not just dozens of machines, but millions of them. It captured the imagination of Dr Cerf and Dr Kahn, who included aspects of its design in the protocols that now power the internet.
^ Schatt, Stan (1991). Linking LANs: A Micro Manager's Guide. McGraw-Hill. p. 200. ISBN 0-8306-3755-9.
Schatt, Stan (1991). Linking LANs: A Micro Manager's Guide. McGraw-Hill. p. 200. ISBN 0-8306-3755-9.
^ Frazer, Karen D. (1995). "NSFNET: A Partnership for High-Speed Networking, Final Report 1987–1995" (PDF). Merit Network, Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2015.
Frazer, Karen D. (1995). "NSFNET: A Partnership for High-Speed Networking, Final Report 1987–1995" (PDF). Merit Network, Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2015.
"NSFNET: A Partnership for High-Speed Networking, Final Report 1987–1995"
^ Ben Segal (1995). "A Short History of Internet Protocols at CERN". Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2011.
Ben Segal (1995). "A Short History of Internet Protocols at CERN". Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2011.
"A Short History of Internet Protocols at CERN"
^ "Internet History in Asia". 16th APAN Meetings/Advanced Network Conference in Busan. Archived from the original on 1 February 2006. Retrieved 25 December 2005.
"Internet History in Asia". 16th APAN Meetings/Advanced Network Conference in Busan. Archived from the original on 1 February 2006. Retrieved 25 December 2005.
16th APAN Meetings/Advanced Network Conference in Busan
^ "The History of NORDUnet" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.
"The History of NORDUnet" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.
^ Clarke, Roger. "Origins and Nature of the Internet in Australia". Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 21 January 2014.
Clarke, Roger. "Origins and Nature of the Internet in Australia". Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 21 January 2014.
"Origins and Nature of the Internet in Australia"
^ Zakon, Robert (November 1997). RFC 2235. IETF. p. 8. doi:10.17487/RFC2235. Retrieved 2 December 2020.
Zakon, Robert (November 1997). RFC 2235. IETF. p. 8. doi:10.17487/RFC2235. Retrieved 2 December 2020.
^ "InfoWorld". 25 September 1989. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017 – via Google Books.
"InfoWorld". 25 September 1989. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017 – via Google Books.
^ "INTERNET MONTHLY REPORTS". February 1990. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
"INTERNET MONTHLY REPORTS". February 1990. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
^ Berners-Lee, Tim. "The Original HTTP as defined in 1991". W3C.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 1997.
Berners-Lee, Tim. "The Original HTTP as defined in 1991". W3C.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 1997.
^ "The website of the world's first-ever web server". info.cern.ch. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010.
"The website of the world's first-ever web server". info.cern.ch. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010.
"The website of the world's first-ever web server"
^ "Stanford Federal Credit Union Pioneers Online Financial Services" (Press release). 21 June 1995. Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.
"Stanford Federal Credit Union Pioneers Online Financial Services" (Press release). 21 June 1995. Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.
"Stanford Federal Credit Union Pioneers Online Financial Services"
^ "History - About us - OP Group". Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.
"History - About us - OP Group". Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018.
^ Harris, Susan R.; Gerich, Elise (April 1996). "Retiring the NSFNET Backbone Service: Chronicling the End of an Era". ConneXions. 10 (4). Archived from the original on 17 August 2013.
Harris, Susan R.; Gerich, Elise (April 1996). "Retiring the NSFNET Backbone Service: Chronicling the End of an Era". ConneXions. 10 (4). Archived from the original on 17 August 2013.
"Retiring the NSFNET Backbone Service: Chronicling the End of an Era"
^ "Measuring digital development: Facts and figures 2021". Telecommunication Development Bureau, International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 16 November 2022.
"Measuring digital development: Facts and figures 2021". Telecommunication Development Bureau, International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 16 November 2022.
"Measuring digital development: Facts and figures 2021"
^ "Total Midyear Population for the World: 1950-2050"". International Programs Center for Demographic and Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2020.
"Total Midyear Population for the World: 1950-2050"". International Programs Center for Demographic and Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2020.
"Total Midyear Population for the World: 1950-2050""
^ Jindal, R. P. (2009). "From millibits to terabits per second and beyond - Over 60 years of innovation". 2009 2nd International Workshop on Electron Devices and Semiconductor Technology: 1–6. doi:10.1109/EDST.2009.5166093. ISBN 978-1-4244-3831-0. S2CID 25112828. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019.
Jindal, R. P. (2009). "From millibits to terabits per second and beyond - Over 60 years of innovation". 2009 2nd International Workshop on Electron Devices and Semiconductor Technology: 1–6. doi:10.1109/EDST.2009.5166093. ISBN 978-1-4244-3831-0. S2CID 25112828. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019.
"From millibits to terabits per second and beyond - Over 60 years of innovation"
2009 2nd International Workshop on Electron Devices and Semiconductor Technology
^ Ward, Mark (3 August 2006). "How the web went world wide". Technology Correspondent. BBC News. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 24 January 2011.
Ward, Mark (3 August 2006). "How the web went world wide". Technology Correspondent. BBC News. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 24 January 2011.
^ "Brazil, Russia, India and China to Lead Internet Growth Through 2011". Clickz.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2008. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"Brazil, Russia, India and China to Lead Internet Growth Through 2011". Clickz.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2008. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"Brazil, Russia, India and China to Lead Internet Growth Through 2011"
^ Coffman, K.G; Odlyzko, A.M. (2 October 1998). "The size and growth rate of the Internet" (PDF). AT&T Labs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 21 May 2007.
Coffman, K.G; Odlyzko, A.M. (2 October 1998). "The size and growth rate of the Internet" (PDF). AT&T Labs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 21 May 2007.
"The size and growth rate of the Internet"
^ Comer, Douglas (2006). The Internet book. Prentice Hall. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-13-233553-9.
Comer, Douglas (2006). The Internet book. Prentice Hall. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-13-233553-9.
^ "World Internet Users and Population Stats". Internet World Stats. Miniwatts Marketing Group. 22 June 2011. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2011.
"World Internet Users and Population Stats". Internet World Stats. Miniwatts Marketing Group. 22 June 2011. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2011.
"World Internet Users and Population Stats"
^ Hilbert, Martin; López, Priscila (April 2011). "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information". Science. 332 (6025): 60–65. Bibcode:2011Sci...332...60H. doi:10.1126/science.1200970. PMID 21310967. S2CID 206531385. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2011.
Hilbert, Martin; López, Priscila (April 2011). "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information". Science. 332 (6025): 60–65. Bibcode:2011Sci...332...60H. doi:10.1126/science.1200970. PMID 21310967. S2CID 206531385. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2011.
"The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information"
^ Klein, Hans (2004). "ICANN and Non-Territorial Sovereignty: Government Without the Nation State". Internet and Public Policy Project. Georgia Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013.
Klein, Hans (2004). "ICANN and Non-Territorial Sovereignty: Government Without the Nation State". Internet and Public Policy Project. Georgia Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013.
"ICANN and Non-Territorial Sovereignty: Government Without the Nation State"
^ Packard, Ashley (2010). Digital Media Law. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-4051-8169-3.
Packard, Ashley (2010). Digital Media Law. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-4051-8169-3.
^ McCarthy, Kieren (1 July 2005). "Bush administration annexes internet". The Register. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011.
McCarthy, Kieren (1 July 2005). "Bush administration annexes internet". The Register. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011.
^ Mueller, Milton L. (2010). Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance. MIT Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-262-01459-5.
Mueller, Milton L. (2010). Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance. MIT Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-262-01459-5.
Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance
^ "ICG Applauds Transfer of IANA Stewardship". IANA Stewardship Transition Coordination Group (ICG). Archived from the original on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2017.
"ICG Applauds Transfer of IANA Stewardship". IANA Stewardship Transition Coordination Group (ICG). Archived from the original on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2017.
"ICG Applauds Transfer of IANA Stewardship"
IANA Stewardship Transition Coordination Group (ICG)
^ "Internet Society (ISOC) All About The Internet: History of the Internet". ISOC. Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2013.
"Internet Society (ISOC) All About The Internet: History of the Internet". ISOC. Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2013.
"Internet Society (ISOC) All About The Internet: History of the Internet"
^ Pasternak, Sean B. (7 March 2006). "Toronto Hydro to Install Wireless Network in Downtown Toronto". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 10 April 2006. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
Pasternak, Sean B. (7 March 2006). "Toronto Hydro to Install Wireless Network in Downtown Toronto". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 10 April 2006. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
"Toronto Hydro to Install Wireless Network in Downtown Toronto"
^ "Mobile and Tablet Internet Usage Exceeds Desktop for First Time Worldwide". StatCounter: Global Stats, Press Release. 1 November 2016. Archived from the original on 1 November 2016. StatCounter Global Stats finds that mobile and tablet devices accounted for 51.3% of Internet usage worldwide in October compared to 48.7% by desktop.
"Mobile and Tablet Internet Usage Exceeds Desktop for First Time Worldwide". StatCounter: Global Stats, Press Release. 1 November 2016. Archived from the original on 1 November 2016. StatCounter Global Stats finds that mobile and tablet devices accounted for 51.3% of Internet usage worldwide in October compared to 48.7% by desktop.
"Mobile and Tablet Internet Usage Exceeds Desktop for First Time Worldwide"
StatCounter Global Stats finds that mobile and tablet devices accounted for 51.3% of Internet usage worldwide in October compared to 48.7% by desktop.
^ "World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2020 (24th Edition/July 2020)". International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2017a. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates). World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators database
"World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2020 (24th Edition/July 2020)". International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2017a. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates). World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators database
"World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2020 (24th Edition/July 2020)"
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates). World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators database
^ Jump up to: a b World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018 (PDF). UNESCO. 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018 (PDF). UNESCO. 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018
^ Jump up to: a b "GSMA The Mobile Economy 2019 - The Mobile Economy". 11 March 2019. Archived from the original on 11 March 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
"GSMA The Mobile Economy 2019 - The Mobile Economy". 11 March 2019. Archived from the original on 11 March 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
"GSMA The Mobile Economy 2019 - The Mobile Economy"
^ Galpaya, Helani (12 April 2019). "Zero-rating in Emerging Economies" (PDF). Global Commission on Internet Governance. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
Galpaya, Helani (12 April 2019). "Zero-rating in Emerging Economies" (PDF). Global Commission on Internet Governance. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
^ "Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI). 2015. Models of Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries. Research brief. The Impacts of Emerging Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries".[dead link]
"Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI). 2015. Models of Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries. Research brief. The Impacts of Emerging Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries".[dead link]
"Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI). 2015. Models of Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries. Research brief. The Impacts of Emerging Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries".
"Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI). 2015. Models of Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries. Research brief. The Impacts of Emerging Mobile Data Services in Developing Countries"
^ Alison GillwAld, ChenAi ChAir, Ariel Futter, KweKu KorAntenG, FolA oduFuwA, John wAlubenGo (12 September 2016). "Much Ado About Nothing? Zero Rating in the African Context" (PDF). Researchictafrica. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Alison GillwAld, ChenAi ChAir, Ariel Futter, KweKu KorAntenG, FolA oduFuwA, John wAlubenGo (12 September 2016). "Much Ado About Nothing? Zero Rating in the African Context" (PDF). Researchictafrica. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Alison GillwAld, ChenAi ChAir, Ariel Futter, KweKu KorAntenG, FolA oduFuwA, John wAlubenGo (12 September 2016). "Much Ado About Nothing? Zero Rating in the African Context" (PDF). Researchictafrica. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
"Much Ado About Nothing? Zero Rating in the African Context"
{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Jump up to: a b J. Postel, ed. (September 1981). Internet Protocol, DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0791. RFC 791. Updated by RFC 1349, 2474, 6864
J. Postel, ed. (September 1981). Internet Protocol, DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0791. RFC 791. Updated by RFC 1349, 2474, 6864
J. Postel, ed. (September 1981). Internet Protocol, DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0791. RFC 791.
Internet Protocol, DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification
^ Huston, Geoff. "IPv4 Address Report, daily generated". Archived from the original on 1 April 2009. Retrieved 20 May 2009.
Huston, Geoff. "IPv4 Address Report, daily generated". Archived from the original on 1 April 2009. Retrieved 20 May 2009.
^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1995). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC1883. RFC 1883.
S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1995). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC1883. RFC 1883.
Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification
^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1998). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC2460. RFC 2460.
S. Deering; R. Hinden (December 1998). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. Network Working Group. doi:10.17487/RFC2460. RFC 2460.
^ S. Deering; R. Hinden (July 2017). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC8200. RFC 8200.
S. Deering; R. Hinden (July 2017). Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC8200. RFC 8200.
^ "Notice of Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) Address Depletion" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 7 August 2009.
"Notice of Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) Address Depletion" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 7 August 2009.
"Notice of Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) Address Depletion"
^ Jeffrey Mogul; Jon Postel (August 1985). Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0950. RFC 950. Updated by RFC 6918.
Jeffrey Mogul; Jon Postel (August 1985). Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0950. RFC 950. Updated by RFC 6918.
Jeffrey Mogul; Jon Postel (August 1985). Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC0950. RFC 950.
^ Fisher, Tim. "How to Find Your Default Gateway IP Address". Lifewire. Archived from the original on 25 February 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019.
Fisher, Tim. "How to Find Your Default Gateway IP Address". Lifewire. Archived from the original on 25 February 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019.
"How to Find Your Default Gateway IP Address"
^ "Default Gateway". techopedia.com. 30 June 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020.
"Default Gateway". techopedia.com. 30 June 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020.
^ "IETF Home Page". Ietf.org. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009.
"IETF Home Page". Ietf.org. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009.
^ "The Difference Between the Internet and the World Wide Web". Webopedia.com. QuinStreet Inc. 24 June 2010. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014.
"The Difference Between the Internet and the World Wide Web". Webopedia.com. QuinStreet Inc. 24 June 2010. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014.
"The Difference Between the Internet and the World Wide Web"
^ "IAB Internet advertising revenue report: 2012 full year results" (PDF). PricewaterhouseCoopers, Internet Advertising Bureau. April 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2013.
"IAB Internet advertising revenue report: 2012 full year results" (PDF). PricewaterhouseCoopers, Internet Advertising Bureau. April 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2013.
"IAB Internet advertising revenue report: 2012 full year results"
^ Brown, Ron (26 October 1972). "Fax invades the mail market". New Scientist. 56 (817): 218–221.
Brown, Ron (26 October 1972). "Fax invades the mail market". New Scientist. 56 (817): 218–221.
^ Luckett, Herbert P. (March 1973). "What's News: Electronic-mail delivery gets started". Popular Science. 202 (3): 85.
Luckett, Herbert P. (March 1973). "What's News: Electronic-mail delivery gets started". Popular Science. 202 (3): 85.
"What's News: Electronic-mail delivery gets started"
^ Booth, C (2010). "Chapter 2: IP Phones, Software VoIP, and Integrated and Mobile VoIP". Library Technology Reports. 46 (5): 11–19.
Booth, C (2010). "Chapter 2: IP Phones, Software VoIP, and Integrated and Mobile VoIP". Library Technology Reports. 46 (5): 11–19.
^ Morrison, Geoff (18 November 2010). "What to know before buying a 'connected' TV – Technology & science – Tech and gadgets – Tech Holiday Guide". NBC News. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
Morrison, Geoff (18 November 2010). "What to know before buying a 'connected' TV – Technology & science – Tech and gadgets – Tech Holiday Guide". NBC News. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
"What to know before buying a 'connected' TV – Technology & science – Tech and gadgets – Tech Holiday Guide"
^ "Press - YouTube". www.youtube.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2020.
"Press - YouTube". www.youtube.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2020.
^ "YouTube now defaults to HTML5". YouTube Engineering and Developers Blog. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018.
"YouTube now defaults to HTML5". YouTube Engineering and Developers Blog. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018.
^ Carlson, Kathie; Flanagin, Michael N.; Martin, Kathleen; Martin, Mary E.; Mendelsohn, John; Rodgers, Priscilla Young; Ronnberg, Ami; Salman, Sherry; Wesley, Deborah A.;  et al. (Authors) (2010).  Arm, Karen; Ueda, Kako; Thulin, Anne; Langerak, Allison; Kiley, Timothy Gus; Wolff, Mary (eds.). The Book of Symbols: Reflections on Archetypal Images. Köln: Taschen. p. 518. ISBN 978-3-8365-1448-4.
Carlson, Kathie; Flanagin, Michael N.; Martin, Kathleen; Martin, Mary E.; Mendelsohn, John; Rodgers, Priscilla Young; Ronnberg, Ami; Salman, Sherry; Wesley, Deborah A.;  et al. (Authors) (2010).  Arm, Karen; Ueda, Kako; Thulin, Anne; Langerak, Allison; Kiley, Timothy Gus; Wolff, Mary (eds.). The Book of Symbols: Reflections on Archetypal Images. Köln: Taschen. p. 518. ISBN 978-3-8365-1448-4.
The Book of Symbols: Reflections on Archetypal Images
^ Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (2 October 2017). "Technology Adoption". Our World in Data. Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019.
Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (2 October 2017). "Technology Adoption". Our World in Data. Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019.
^ "Individuals using the Internet 2005 to 2014" Archived 28 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.
"Individuals using the Internet 2005 to 2014" Archived 28 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Key ICT indicators for developed and developing countries and the world (totals and penetration rates), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.
"Individuals using the Internet 2005 to 2014"
^ "Internet users per 100 inhabitants 1997 to 2007" Archived 17 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, ICT Data and Statistics (IDS), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.
"Internet users per 100 inhabitants 1997 to 2007" Archived 17 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, ICT Data and Statistics (IDS), International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 25 May 2015.
"Internet users per 100 inhabitants 1997 to 2007"
^ Internet users graphs Archived 9 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Market Information and Statistics, International Telecommunication Union
Internet users graphs Archived 9 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Market Information and Statistics, International Telecommunication Union
^ "Google Earth demonstrates how technology benefits RI's civil society, govt". Antara News. 26 May 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012. Retrieved 19 November 2012.
"Google Earth demonstrates how technology benefits RI's civil society, govt". Antara News. 26 May 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012. Retrieved 19 November 2012.
"Google Earth demonstrates how technology benefits RI's civil society, govt"
^ Steve Dent. "There are now 3 billion Internet users, mostly in rich countries". Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014.
Steve Dent. "There are now 3 billion Internet users, mostly in rich countries". Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014.
"There are now 3 billion Internet users, mostly in rich countries"
^ "Statistical Report on Internet Development in China" (PDF). Cnnic.com. January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019.
"Statistical Report on Internet Development in China" (PDF). Cnnic.com. January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019.
"Statistical Report on Internet Development in China"
^ "World Internet Users Statistics and 2019 World Population Stats". internetworldstats.com. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2019.
"World Internet Users Statistics and 2019 World Population Stats". internetworldstats.com. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2019.
"World Internet Users Statistics and 2019 World Population Stats"
^ "Digital 2020: 3.8 billion people use social media". 30 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2020.
"Digital 2020: 3.8 billion people use social media". 30 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2020.
"Digital 2020: 3.8 billion people use social media"
^ "Internet". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 19 March 2021.
"Internet". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 19 March 2021.
^ Jump up to: a b "Number of Internet Users by Language". Internet World Stats, Miniwatts Marketing Group. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2012.
"Number of Internet Users by Language". Internet World Stats, Miniwatts Marketing Group. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2012.
Internet World Stats, Miniwatts Marketing Group
^ "World Internet Usage Statistics News and Population Stats". 30 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 March 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2011.
"World Internet Usage Statistics News and Population Stats". 30 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 March 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2011.
"World Internet Usage Statistics News and Population Stats"
^ How men and women use the Internet Pew Research Center 28 December 2005
How men and women use the Internet Pew Research Center 28 December 2005
^ "Rapleaf Study on Social Network Users". Archived from the original on 20 March 2009.
"Rapleaf Study on Social Network Users". Archived from the original on 20 March 2009.
^ "Women Ahead of Men in Online Tv, Dvr, Games, And Social Media". Entrepreneur.com. 1 May 2008. Archived from the original on 16 September 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
"Women Ahead of Men in Online Tv, Dvr, Games, And Social Media". Entrepreneur.com. 1 May 2008. Archived from the original on 16 September 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
"Women Ahead of Men in Online Tv, Dvr, Games, And Social Media"
^ "Technorati's State of the Blogosphere". Technorati. Archived from the original on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
"Technorati's State of the Blogosphere". Technorati. Archived from the original on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000–2012" Archived 9 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine, International Telecommunication Union (Geneva), June 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2013.
"Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000–2012" Archived 9 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine, International Telecommunication Union (Geneva), June 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2013.
"Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000–2012"
^ Seese, Michael (2009). Scrappy Information Security. p. 130. ISBN 978-1-60005-132-6. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2015.
Seese, Michael (2009). Scrappy Information Security. p. 130. ISBN 978-1-60005-132-6. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2015.
^ netizen Archived 21 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Dictionary.com
netizen Archived 21 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Dictionary.com
^ Hauben, Michael. "The Net and Netizens". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.
Hauben, Michael. "The Net and Netizens". Columbia University. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.
^ "A Brief History of the Internet". the Internet Society. Archived from the original on 4 June 2007.
"A Brief History of the Internet". the Internet Society. Archived from the original on 4 June 2007.
^ "Oxford Dictionaries – internaut". oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2015.
"Oxford Dictionaries – internaut". oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2015.
^ Mossberger, Karen; Tolbert, Caroline J.; McNeal, Ramona S. (23 November 2011). Digital Citizenship – The Internet, Society and Participation. ISBN 978-0-8194-5606-9.
Mossberger, Karen; Tolbert, Caroline J.; McNeal, Ramona S. (23 November 2011). Digital Citizenship – The Internet, Society and Participation. ISBN 978-0-8194-5606-9.
Digital Citizenship – The Internet, Society and Participation
^ "Usage of content languages for websites". W3Techs.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2013.
"Usage of content languages for websites". W3Techs.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2013.
"Usage of content languages for websites"
^ "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.
"Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.
"Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012"
^ "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.
"Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012" Archived 26 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 29 June 2013.
"Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012"
^ Reips, U.-D. (2008). "How Internet-mediated research changes science". Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 268–294. ISBN 9780521694643. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014.
Reips, U.-D. (2008). "How Internet-mediated research changes science". Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 268–294. ISBN 9780521694643. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014.
Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications
^ "The Virtual Private Nightmare: VPN". Librenix. 4 August 2004. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2010.
"The Virtual Private Nightmare: VPN". Librenix. 4 August 2004. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2010.
^ Dariusz Jemielniak; Aleksandra Przegalinska (18 February 2020). Collaborative Society. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-35645-9. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
Dariusz Jemielniak; Aleksandra Przegalinska (18 February 2020). Collaborative Society. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-35645-9. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.
^ Moore, Keith (27 July 2013). "Twitter 'report abuse' button calls after rape threats". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.
Moore, Keith (27 July 2013). "Twitter 'report abuse' button calls after rape threats". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.
"Twitter 'report abuse' button calls after rape threats"
^ Kessler, Sarah (11 October 2010). "5 Fun and Safe Social Networks for Children". Mashable. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.
Kessler, Sarah (11 October 2010). "5 Fun and Safe Social Networks for Children". Mashable. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014.
"5 Fun and Safe Social Networks for Children"
^ Jump up to: a b "Communication in our life". StudFiles (in Russian). Retrieved 16 May 2023.
"Communication in our life". StudFiles (in Russian). Retrieved 16 May 2023.
^ Goldman, Russell (22 January 2008). "Do It Yourself! Amateur Porn Stars Make Bank". ABC News. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011.
Goldman, Russell (22 January 2008). "Do It Yourself! Amateur Porn Stars Make Bank". ABC News. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011.
"Do It Yourself! Amateur Porn Stars Make Bank"
^ Spohn, Dave (15 December 2009). "Top Online Game Trends of the Decade". About.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011.
Spohn, Dave (15 December 2009). "Top Online Game Trends of the Decade". About.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011.
^ Spohn, Dave (2 June 2011). "Internet Game Timeline: 1963 – 2004". About.com. Archived from the original on 25 April 2006.
Spohn, Dave (2 June 2011). "Internet Game Timeline: 1963 – 2004". About.com. Archived from the original on 25 April 2006.
^ Carole Hughes; Boston College. "The Relationship Between Internet Use and Loneliness Among College Students". Boston College. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2011.
Carole Hughes; Boston College. "The Relationship Between Internet Use and Loneliness Among College Students". Boston College. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2011.
"The Relationship Between Internet Use and Loneliness Among College Students"
^ Barker, Eric (2017). Barking Up the Wrong Tree. HarperCollins. pp. 235–6. ISBN 9780062416049.
Barker, Eric (2017). Barking Up the Wrong Tree. HarperCollins. pp. 235–6. ISBN 9780062416049.
^ Thornton, Patricia M. (2003). "The New Cybersects: Resistance and Repression in the Reform era".  In Perry, Elizabeth; Selden, Mark (eds.). Chinese Society: Change, Conflict and Resistance (2 ed.). London and New York: Routledge. pp. 149–150. ISBN 9780415560740.
Thornton, Patricia M. (2003). "The New Cybersects: Resistance and Repression in the Reform era".  In Perry, Elizabeth; Selden, Mark (eds.). Chinese Society: Change, Conflict and Resistance (2 ed.). London and New York: Routledge. pp. 149–150. ISBN 9780415560740.
Chinese Society: Change, Conflict and Resistance
^ "Net abuse hits small city firms". The Scotsman. Edinburgh. 11 September 2003. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2009.
"Net abuse hits small city firms". The Scotsman. Edinburgh. 11 September 2003. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2009.
^ Carr, Nicholas G. (7 June 2010). The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. W.W. Norton. p. 276. ISBN 978-0393072228.
Carr, Nicholas G. (7 June 2010). The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. W.W. Norton. p. 276. ISBN 978-0393072228.
The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains
^ "The New Digital Economy: How it will transform business" (PDF). Oxford Economics. 2 July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2014.
"The New Digital Economy: How it will transform business" (PDF). Oxford Economics. 2 July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2014.
"The New Digital Economy: How it will transform business"
^ Badger, Emily (6 February 2013). "How the Internet Reinforces Inequality in the Real World". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2013.
Badger, Emily (6 February 2013). "How the Internet Reinforces Inequality in the Real World". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2013.
"How the Internet Reinforces Inequality in the Real World"
^ "E-commerce will make the shopping mall a retail wasteland". ZDNet. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013.
"E-commerce will make the shopping mall a retail wasteland". ZDNet. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013.
"E-commerce will make the shopping mall a retail wasteland"
^ "'Free Shipping Day' Promotion Spurs Late-Season Online Spending Surge, Improving Season-to-Date Growth Rate to 16 Percent vs. Year Ago". Comscore. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013.
"'Free Shipping Day' Promotion Spurs Late-Season Online Spending Surge, Improving Season-to-Date Growth Rate to 16 Percent vs. Year Ago". Comscore. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013.
"'Free Shipping Day' Promotion Spurs Late-Season Online Spending Surge, Improving Season-to-Date Growth Rate to 16 Percent vs. Year Ago"
^ "The Death of the American Shopping Mall". The Atlantic – Cities. 26 December 2012. Archived from the original on 15 February 2013.
"The Death of the American Shopping Mall". The Atlantic – Cities. 26 December 2012. Archived from the original on 15 February 2013.
"The Death of the American Shopping Mall"
^ Harris, Michael (2 January 2015). "Book review: 'The Internet Is Not the Answer' by Andrew Keen". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 20 January 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2015.
Harris, Michael (2 January 2015). "Book review: 'The Internet Is Not the Answer' by Andrew Keen". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 20 January 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2015.
"Book review: 'The Internet Is Not the Answer' by Andrew Keen"
^ MM Wanderley; D Birnbaum; J Malloch (2006). New Interfaces For Musical Expression. IRCAM – Centre Pompidou. p. 180. ISBN 978-2-84426-314-8.
MM Wanderley; D Birnbaum; J Malloch (2006). New Interfaces For Musical Expression. IRCAM – Centre Pompidou. p. 180. ISBN 978-2-84426-314-8.
^ Nancy T. Lombardo (June 2008). "Putting Wikis to Work in Libraries". Medical Reference Services Quarterly. 27 (2): 129–145. doi:10.1080/02763860802114223. PMID 18844087. S2CID 11552140.
Nancy T. Lombardo (June 2008). "Putting Wikis to Work in Libraries". Medical Reference Services Quarterly. 27 (2): 129–145. doi:10.1080/02763860802114223. PMID 18844087. S2CID 11552140.
^ Noveck, Beth Simone (March 2007). "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". Journal of Legal Education. 57 (1). Archived from the original on 3 July 2014.(subscription required)
Noveck, Beth Simone (March 2007). "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". Journal of Legal Education. 57 (1). Archived from the original on 3 July 2014.(subscription required)
Noveck, Beth Simone (March 2007). "Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education". Journal of Legal Education. 57 (1). Archived from the original on 3 July 2014.
"Wikipedia and the Future of Legal Education"
^ "WikiStats by S23". S23Wiki. 3 April 2008. Archived from the original on 25 August 2014. Retrieved 7 April 2007.
"WikiStats by S23". S23Wiki. 3 April 2008. Archived from the original on 25 August 2014. Retrieved 7 April 2007.
^ "Alexa Web Search – Top 500". Alexa Internet. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015.
"Alexa Web Search – Top 500". Alexa Internet. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015.
^ "The Arab Uprising's Cascading Effects". Miller-mccune.com. 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 February 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011.
"The Arab Uprising's Cascading Effects". Miller-mccune.com. 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 February 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011.
^ "The Role of the Internet in Democratic Transition: Case Study of the Arab Spring" (PDF). 5 July 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2012., Davit Chokoshvili, Master's Thesis, June 2011
"The Role of the Internet in Democratic Transition: Case Study of the Arab Spring" (PDF). 5 July 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2012., Davit Chokoshvili, Master's Thesis, June 2011
"The Role of the Internet in Democratic Transition: Case Study of the Arab Spring" (PDF). 5 July 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2012.
"The Role of the Internet in Democratic Transition: Case Study of the Arab Spring"
^ Kirkpatrick, David D. (9 February 2011). "Wired and Shrewd, Young Egyptians Guide Revolt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.
Kirkpatrick, David D. (9 February 2011). "Wired and Shrewd, Young Egyptians Guide Revolt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.
"Wired and Shrewd, Young Egyptians Guide Revolt"
^ Ronald Deibert; John Palfrey; Rafal Rohozinski; Jonathan Zittrain (25 January 2008). Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-29072-2.
Ronald Deibert; John Palfrey; Rafal Rohozinski; Jonathan Zittrain (25 January 2008). Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-29072-2.
Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering
^ Larry Diamond; Marc F. Plattner (30 July 2012). Liberation Technology: Social Media and the Struggle for Democracy. JHU Press. ISBN 978-1-4214-0568-1.
Larry Diamond; Marc F. Plattner (30 July 2012). Liberation Technology: Social Media and the Struggle for Democracy. JHU Press. ISBN 978-1-4214-0568-1.
Liberation Technology: Social Media and the Struggle for Democracy
^ Roodman, David (2 October 2009). "Kiva Is Not Quite What It Seems". Center for Global Development. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010. Retrieved 16 January 2010.
Roodman, David (2 October 2009). "Kiva Is Not Quite What It Seems". Center for Global Development. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010. Retrieved 16 January 2010.
^ Strom, Stephanie (9 November 2009). "Confusion on Where Money Lent via Kiva Goes". The New York Times. p. 6. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.
Strom, Stephanie (9 November 2009). "Confusion on Where Money Lent via Kiva Goes". The New York Times. p. 6. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.
"Confusion on Where Money Lent via Kiva Goes"
^ Andriole, Steve. "Cyberwarfare Will Explode In 2020 (Because It's Cheap, Easy And Effective)". Forbes. Retrieved 18 May 2021.
Andriole, Steve. "Cyberwarfare Will Explode In 2020 (Because It's Cheap, Easy And Effective)". Forbes. Retrieved 18 May 2021.
"Cyberwarfare Will Explode In 2020 (Because It's Cheap, Easy And Effective)"
^ Diffie, Whitfield; Susan Landau (August 2008). "Internet Eavesdropping: A Brave New World of Wiretapping". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 13 November 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2009.
Diffie, Whitfield; Susan Landau (August 2008). "Internet Eavesdropping: A Brave New World of Wiretapping". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 13 November 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2009.
"Internet Eavesdropping: A Brave New World of Wiretapping"
^ "CALEA Archive". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 25 October 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
"CALEA Archive". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 25 October 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
^ "CALEA: The Perils of Wiretapping the Internet". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 16 March 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
"CALEA: The Perils of Wiretapping the Internet". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). Archived from the original on 16 March 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
"CALEA: The Perils of Wiretapping the Internet"
^ "CALEA: Frequently Asked Questions". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 1 May 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
"CALEA: Frequently Asked Questions". Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 1 May 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
^ "American Council on Education vs. FCC, Decision, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" (PDF). 9 June 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2013.
"American Council on Education vs. FCC, Decision, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" (PDF). 9 June 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2013.
"American Council on Education vs. FCC, Decision, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit"
^ Hill, Michael (11 October 2004). "Government funds chat room surveillance research". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 11 May 2010. Retrieved 19 March 2009.
Hill, Michael (11 October 2004). "Government funds chat room surveillance research". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 11 May 2010. Retrieved 19 March 2009.
"Government funds chat room surveillance research"
^ McCullagh, Declan (30 January 2007). "FBI turns to broad new wiretap method". ZDNet News. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 13 March 2009.
McCullagh, Declan (30 January 2007). "FBI turns to broad new wiretap method". ZDNet News. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 13 March 2009.
^ "First round in Internet war goes to Iranian intelligence". Debkafile. 28 June 2009. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013.
"First round in Internet war goes to Iranian intelligence". Debkafile. 28 June 2009. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013.
"First round in Internet war goes to Iranian intelligence"
^ "Freedom on the Net 2018" (PDF). Freedom House. November 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018.
"Freedom on the Net 2018" (PDF). Freedom House. November 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018.
^ OpenNet Initiative "Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet" Archived 10 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 8 November 2011 and "Country Profiles" Archived 26 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, the OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative partnership of the Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto; the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University; and the SecDev Group, Ottawa
OpenNet Initiative "Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet" Archived 10 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 8 November 2011 and "Country Profiles" Archived 26 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, the OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative partnership of the Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto; the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University; and the SecDev Group, Ottawa
"Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet"
^ Due to legal concerns the OpenNet Initiative does not check for filtering of child pornography and because their classifications focus on technical filtering, they do not include other types of censorship.
Due to legal concerns the OpenNet Initiative does not check for filtering of child pornography and because their classifications focus on technical filtering, they do not include other types of censorship.
^ "Enemies of the Internet 2014: Entities at the heart of censorship and surveillance". Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014.
"Enemies of the Internet 2014: Entities at the heart of censorship and surveillance". Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014.
"Enemies of the Internet 2014: Entities at the heart of censorship and surveillance"
^ "Internet Enemies" (PDF). Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 12 March 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2017.
"Internet Enemies" (PDF). Reporters Without Borders. Paris. 12 March 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2017.
^ Deibert, Ronald J.; Palfrey, John G.; Rohozinski, Rafal; Zittrain, Jonathan (April 2010). Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262514354. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.
Deibert, Ronald J.; Palfrey, John G.; Rohozinski, Rafal; Zittrain, Jonathan (April 2010). Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262514354. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.
Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace
^ "Finland censors anti-censorship site". The Register. 18 February 2008. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 19 February 2008.
"Finland censors anti-censorship site". The Register. 18 February 2008. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 19 February 2008.
^ Albert, Réka; Jeong, Hawoong; Barabási, Albert-László (9 September 1999). "Diameter of the World-Wide Web". Nature. 401 (6749): 130–131. arXiv:cond-mat/9907038. Bibcode:1999Natur.401..130A. doi:10.1038/43601. S2CID 4419938.
Albert, Réka; Jeong, Hawoong; Barabási, Albert-László (9 September 1999). "Diameter of the World-Wide Web". Nature. 401 (6749): 130–131. arXiv:cond-mat/9907038. Bibcode:1999Natur.401..130A. doi:10.1038/43601. S2CID 4419938.
^ "Georgian woman cuts off web access to whole of Armenia". The Guardian. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 25 August 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2012.
"Georgian woman cuts off web access to whole of Armenia". The Guardian. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 25 August 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2012.
"Georgian woman cuts off web access to whole of Armenia"
^ Cowie, James. "Egypt Leaves the Internet". Renesys. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2011.
Cowie, James. "Egypt Leaves the Internet". Renesys. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2011.
^ "Egypt severs internet connection amid growing unrest". BBC News. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012.
"Egypt severs internet connection amid growing unrest". BBC News. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012.
"Egypt severs internet connection amid growing unrest"
^ Jump up to: a b Coroama, Vlad C.; Hilty, Lorenz M. (February 2014). "Assessing Internet energy intensity: A review of methods and results" (PDF). Environmental Impact Assessment Review. 45: 63–68. doi:10.1016/j.eiar.2013.12.004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020.
Coroama, Vlad C.; Hilty, Lorenz M. (February 2014). "Assessing Internet energy intensity: A review of methods and results" (PDF). Environmental Impact Assessment Review. 45: 63–68. doi:10.1016/j.eiar.2013.12.004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020.
"Assessing Internet energy intensity: A review of methods and results"
^ Giles, Jim (26 October 2011). "Internet responsible for 2 per cent of global energy usage". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014.,
Giles, Jim (26 October 2011). "Internet responsible for 2 per cent of global energy usage". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014.,
Giles, Jim (26 October 2011). "Internet responsible for 2 per cent of global energy usage". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014.
"Internet responsible for 2 per cent of global energy usage"
^ Raghavan, Barath; Ma, Justin (14 November 2011). "The Energy and Emergy of the Internet" (PDF). Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks. Cambridge, MA.: ACM SIGCOMM: 1–6. doi:10.1145/2070562.2070571. ISBN 9781450310598. S2CID 6125953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2014.
Raghavan, Barath; Ma, Justin (14 November 2011). "The Energy and Emergy of the Internet" (PDF). Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks. Cambridge, MA.: ACM SIGCOMM: 1–6. doi:10.1145/2070562.2070571. ISBN 9781450310598. S2CID 6125953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2014.
Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks
^ Cwienk, Jeannette (11 July 2019). "Is Netflix bad for the environment? How streaming video contributes to climate change | DW | 11.07.2019". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
Cwienk, Jeannette (11 July 2019). "Is Netflix bad for the environment? How streaming video contributes to climate change | DW | 11.07.2019". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
"Is Netflix bad for the environment? How streaming video contributes to climate change | DW | 11.07.2019"
^ ""Climate crisis: The Unsustainable Use of Online Video" : Our new report". The Shift Project. 10 July 2019. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
""Climate crisis: The Unsustainable Use of Online Video" : Our new report". The Shift Project. 10 July 2019. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
""Climate crisis: The Unsustainable Use of Online Video" : Our new report"
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1:  This article incorporates text from a free content work. . Text taken from World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018​, 202,  UNESCO. To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
This article incorporates text from a free content work. . Text taken from World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018​, 202,  UNESCO. To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
The webpage contains an image of a Definition of Free Cultural Works logo notext.svg here.
World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018​
To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: First Monday, a peer-reviewed journal on the Internet by the University Library of the University of Illinois at Chicago, ISSN 1396-0466
	Bullet Point 2: The Internet Explained, Vincent Zegna & Mike Pepper, Sonet Digital, November 2005, pp. 1–7.
	Bullet Point 3: Abram, Cleo (8 January 2020). "How Does the Internet Work?". YouTube. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2020.
	Bullet Point 4: Castells, Manuel (2010). The Rise of the Network Society. Wiley. ISBN 9781405196864.
First Monday, a peer-reviewed journal on the Internet by the University Library of the University of Illinois at Chicago, ISSN 1396-0466
The Internet Explained, Vincent Zegna & Mike Pepper, Sonet Digital, November 2005, pp. 1–7.
Abram, Cleo (8 January 2020). "How Does the Internet Work?". YouTube. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2020.
Castells, Manuel (2010). The Rise of the Network Society. Wiley. ISBN 9781405196864.
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Definitions from Wiktionary
	Bullet Point 2: Media from Commons
	Bullet Point 3: News from Wikinews
	Bullet Point 4: Quotations from Wikiquote
	Bullet Point 5: Texts from Wikisource
	Bullet Point 6: Textbooks from Wikibooks
	Bullet Point 7: Resources from Wikiversity
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: The Internet Society
	Bullet Point 2: Living Internet, Internet history and related information, including information from many creators of the Internet
Living Internet, Internet history and related information, including information from many creators of the Internet
showvteMedia cultureMedia
24-hour news cycle
Alternative media
Digital media
Electronic media
Mass media
Mainstream media
New media
News broadcasting
News media
Old media
Social media
State media
Ideology
Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music
DeceptionForms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Philosophers
Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan
Jacques Rancière
Counterculture
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Review bomb
Strike action
In academia
Influence of mass media
Media studies
Mediatization
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd
Issues
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Social influence
Synonyms
Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle
Media
24-hour news cycle
Alternative media
Digital media
Electronic media
Mass media
Mainstream media
New media
News broadcasting
News media
Old media
Social media
State media
24-hour news cycle
Alternative media
Digital media
Electronic media
Mass media
Mainstream media
New media
News broadcasting
News media
Old media
Social media
State media
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 24-hour news cycle
	Bullet Point 2: Alternative media
	Bullet Point 3: Digital media
	Bullet Point 4: Electronic media
	Bullet Point 5: Mass media
	Bullet Point 6: Mainstream media
	Bullet Point 7: New media
	Bullet Point 8: News broadcasting
	Bullet Point 9: News media
	Bullet Point 10: Old media
	Bullet Point 11: Social media
	Bullet Point 12: State media
Ideology
Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music
Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Mainstream
	Bullet Point 2: Advanced capitalism
	Bullet Point 3: American Dream
	Bullet Point 4: Bipartisanship
	Bullet Point 5: Consumerism
	Bullet Point 6: Pensée unique
	Bullet Point 7: Pop music
DeceptionForms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Forms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Forms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Advertising
	Bullet Point 2: Propaganda
Fake news
	Bullet Point 3: Public relations
	Bullet Point 4: Spin
	Bullet Point 5: Tabloid journalism
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Fake news
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Cult of personality
	Bullet Point 2: Dumbing down
	Bullet Point 3: Framing
	Bullet Point 4: Media circus
	Bullet Point 5: Media event
	Bullet Point 6: Narcotizing dysfunction
	Bullet Point 7: Recuperation
	Bullet Point 8: Sensationalism
	Bullet Point 9: Viral phenomenon
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Catch and kill
	Bullet Point 2: Crowd manipulation
	Bullet Point 3: Managing the news
	Bullet Point 4: Media manipulation
Philosophers
Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan
Jacques Rancière
Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan
Jacques Rancière
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Theodor W. Adorno
	Bullet Point 2: Jean Baudrillard
	Bullet Point 3: Edward Bernays
	Bullet Point 4: Noam Chomsky
	Bullet Point 5: Guy Debord
	Bullet Point 6: Walter Lippmann
	Bullet Point 7: Marshall McLuhan
	Bullet Point 8: Jacques Rancière
Counterculture
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Review bomb
Strike action
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Review bomb
Strike action
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Boycott
	Bullet Point 2: Call-out culture
	Bullet Point 3: Cancel culture
	Bullet Point 4: Civil disobedience
	Bullet Point 5: Culture jamming
	Bullet Point 6: Demonstration
	Bullet Point 7: Graffiti
	Bullet Point 8: Occupation
	Bullet Point 9: Political satire
	Bullet Point 10: Protest
	Bullet Point 11: Punk
	Bullet Point 12: Review bomb
	Bullet Point 13: Strike action
In academia
Influence of mass media
Media studies
Mediatization
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd
Influence of mass media
Media studies
Mediatization
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Influence of mass media
	Bullet Point 2: Media studies
	Bullet Point 3: Mediatization
	Bullet Point 4: Semiotic democracy
	Bullet Point 5: The Lonely Crowd
Issues
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Social influence
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Social influence
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Anonymity
	Bullet Point 2: Concentration of media ownership
	Bullet Point 3: Freedom of speech
	Bullet Point 4: Media bias
	Bullet Point 5: Privacy
	Bullet Point 6: Social influence
Synonyms
Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle
Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Advanced capitalism
	Bullet Point 2: Culture industry
	Bullet Point 3: Mass society
	Bullet Point 4: Post-Fordism
	Bullet Point 5: Society of the Spectacle
showvteSemantic WebBackground
Databases
Hypertext
Internet
Ontologies
Semantics
Semantic networks
World Wide Web
Sub-topics
Dataspaces
Hyperdata
Linked data
Rule-based systems
Applications
Semantic analytics
Semantic broker
Semantic computing
Semantic mapper
Semantic matching
Semantic publishing
Semantic reasoner
Semantic search
Semantic service-oriented architecture
Semantic wiki
Solid
Related topics
Collective intelligence
Description logic
Folksonomy
Geotagging
Information architecture
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge management
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Library 2.0
Digital library
Digital humanities
Metadata
References
Topic map
Web 2.0
Web engineering
Web Science Trust
StandardsSyntax and supporting technologies
HTTP
IRI
URI
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
RRID
SPARQL
XML
Semantic HTML
Schemas, ontologies and rules
Common Logic
OWL
RDFS
Rule Interchange Format
Semantic Web Rule Language
ALPS
SHACL
Semantic annotation
eRDF
GRDDL
Microdata
Microformats
RDFa
SAWSDL
Facebook Platform
Common vocabularies
DOAP
Dublin Core
FOAF
Schema.org
SIOC
SKOS
Microformat vocabularies
hAtom
hCalendar
hCard
hProduct
hRecipe
hReview
Background
Databases
Hypertext
Internet
Ontologies
Semantics
Semantic networks
World Wide Web
Databases
Hypertext
Internet
Ontologies
Semantics
Semantic networks
World Wide Web
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Databases
	Bullet Point 2: Hypertext
	Bullet Point 3: Internet
	Bullet Point 4: Ontologies
	Bullet Point 5: Semantics
	Bullet Point 6: Semantic networks
	Bullet Point 7: World Wide Web
Sub-topics
Dataspaces
Hyperdata
Linked data
Rule-based systems
Dataspaces
Hyperdata
Linked data
Rule-based systems
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Dataspaces
	Bullet Point 2: Hyperdata
	Bullet Point 3: Linked data
	Bullet Point 4: Rule-based systems
Applications
Semantic analytics
Semantic broker
Semantic computing
Semantic mapper
Semantic matching
Semantic publishing
Semantic reasoner
Semantic search
Semantic service-oriented architecture
Semantic wiki
Solid
Semantic analytics
Semantic broker
Semantic computing
Semantic mapper
Semantic matching
Semantic publishing
Semantic reasoner
Semantic search
Semantic service-oriented architecture
Semantic wiki
Solid
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Semantic analytics
	Bullet Point 2: Semantic broker
	Bullet Point 3: Semantic computing
	Bullet Point 4: Semantic mapper
	Bullet Point 5: Semantic matching
	Bullet Point 6: Semantic publishing
	Bullet Point 7: Semantic reasoner
	Bullet Point 8: Semantic search
	Bullet Point 9: Semantic service-oriented architecture
	Bullet Point 10: Semantic wiki
	Bullet Point 11: Solid
Related topics
Collective intelligence
Description logic
Folksonomy
Geotagging
Information architecture
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge management
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Library 2.0
Digital library
Digital humanities
Metadata
References
Topic map
Web 2.0
Web engineering
Web Science Trust
Collective intelligence
Description logic
Folksonomy
Geotagging
Information architecture
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge management
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Library 2.0
Digital library
Digital humanities
Metadata
References
Topic map
Web 2.0
Web engineering
Web Science Trust
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Collective intelligence
	Bullet Point 2: Description logic
	Bullet Point 3: Folksonomy
	Bullet Point 4: Geotagging
	Bullet Point 5: Information architecture
	Bullet Point 6: Knowledge extraction
	Bullet Point 7: Knowledge management
	Bullet Point 8: Knowledge representation and reasoning
	Bullet Point 9: Library 2.0
	Bullet Point 10: Digital library
	Bullet Point 11: Digital humanities
	Bullet Point 12: Metadata
	Bullet Point 13: References
	Bullet Point 14: Topic map
	Bullet Point 15: Web 2.0
	Bullet Point 16: Web engineering
	Bullet Point 17: Web Science Trust
StandardsSyntax and supporting technologies
HTTP
IRI
URI
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
RRID
SPARQL
XML
Semantic HTML
Schemas, ontologies and rules
Common Logic
OWL
RDFS
Rule Interchange Format
Semantic Web Rule Language
ALPS
SHACL
Semantic annotation
eRDF
GRDDL
Microdata
Microformats
RDFa
SAWSDL
Facebook Platform
Common vocabularies
DOAP
Dublin Core
FOAF
Schema.org
SIOC
SKOS
Microformat vocabularies
hAtom
hCalendar
hCard
hProduct
hRecipe
hReview
Syntax and supporting technologies
HTTP
IRI
URI
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
RRID
SPARQL
XML
Semantic HTML
Schemas, ontologies and rules
Common Logic
OWL
RDFS
Rule Interchange Format
Semantic Web Rule Language
ALPS
SHACL
Semantic annotation
eRDF
GRDDL
Microdata
Microformats
RDFa
SAWSDL
Facebook Platform
Common vocabularies
DOAP
Dublin Core
FOAF
Schema.org
SIOC
SKOS
Microformat vocabularies
hAtom
hCalendar
hCard
hProduct
hRecipe
hReview
Syntax and supporting technologies
HTTP
IRI
URI
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
RRID
SPARQL
XML
Semantic HTML
HTTP
IRI
URI
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
RRID
SPARQL
XML
Semantic HTML
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: HTTP
	Bullet Point 2: IRI
URI
	Bullet Point 3: RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
	Bullet Point 4: RRID
	Bullet Point 5: SPARQL
	Bullet Point 6: XML
	Bullet Point 7: Semantic HTML
RDF
triples
RDF/XML
JSON-LD
Turtle
TriG
Notation3
N-Triples
TriX (no W3C standard)
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: triples
	Bullet Point 2: RDF/XML
	Bullet Point 3: JSON-LD
	Bullet Point 4: Turtle
	Bullet Point 5: TriG
	Bullet Point 6: Notation3
	Bullet Point 7: N-Triples
	Bullet Point 8: TriX (no W3C standard)
Schemas, ontologies and rules
Common Logic
OWL
RDFS
Rule Interchange Format
Semantic Web Rule Language
ALPS
SHACL
Common Logic
OWL
RDFS
Rule Interchange Format
Semantic Web Rule Language
ALPS
SHACL
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Common Logic
	Bullet Point 2: OWL
	Bullet Point 3: RDFS
	Bullet Point 4: Rule Interchange Format
	Bullet Point 5: Semantic Web Rule Language
	Bullet Point 6: ALPS
	Bullet Point 7: SHACL
Semantic annotation
eRDF
GRDDL
Microdata
Microformats
RDFa
SAWSDL
Facebook Platform
eRDF
GRDDL
Microdata
Microformats
RDFa
SAWSDL
Facebook Platform
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: eRDF
	Bullet Point 2: GRDDL
	Bullet Point 3: Microdata
	Bullet Point 4: Microformats
	Bullet Point 5: RDFa
	Bullet Point 6: SAWSDL
	Bullet Point 7: Facebook Platform
Common vocabularies
DOAP
Dublin Core
FOAF
Schema.org
SIOC
SKOS
DOAP
Dublin Core
FOAF
Schema.org
SIOC
SKOS
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: DOAP
	Bullet Point 2: Dublin Core
	Bullet Point 3: FOAF
	Bullet Point 4: Schema.org
	Bullet Point 5: SIOC
	Bullet Point 6: SKOS
Microformat vocabularies
hAtom
hCalendar
hCard
hProduct
hRecipe
hReview
hAtom
hCalendar
hCard
hProduct
hRecipe
hReview
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: hAtom
	Bullet Point 2: hCalendar
	Bullet Point 3: hCard
	Bullet Point 4: hProduct
	Bullet Point 5: hRecipe
	Bullet Point 6: hReview
showvteCloud computingAs a service
Content as a service
Data as a service
Desktop as a service
Function as a service
Infrastructure as a service
Integration platform as a service
Backend as a service
Network as a service
Platform as a service
Security as a service
Software as a service
Technologies
Cloud database
Cloud storage
Data centers
Distributed file system for cloud
Hardware virtualization
Internet
Native cloud application
Networking
Security
Structured storage
Virtual appliance
Web APIs
Virtual private cloud
Applications
Box
Cloud-native processor
Dropbox
Google
Workspace
Drive
HP Cloud (closed)
IBM Cloud
Microsoft
Office 365
OneDrive
Nextcloud
Oracle Cloud
Rackspace
Salesforce
Workday
Zoho
Platforms
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
AppScale
Box
Bluemix
CloudBolt
Cloud Foundry
Cloud-native processor
Cocaine (PaaS)
Creatio
Engine Yard
Helion
GE Predix
Google App Engine
GreenQloud
Heroku
IBM Cloud
Inktank
Jelastic
Microsoft Azure
MindSphere
Netlify
Oracle Cloud
OutSystems
openQRM
OpenShift
PythonAnywhere
RightScale
Scalr
Force.com
SAP Cloud Platform
Splunk
Vercel
VMware vCloud Air
WaveMaker
Infrastructure
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
Abiquo Enterprise Edition
CloudStack
Citrix Cloud
Deft
DigitalOcean
EMC Atmos
Eucalyptus
Fujitsu
Google Cloud Platform
GreenButton
GreenQloud
IBM Cloud
iland
Joyent
Linode
Lunacloud
Microsoft Azure
Mirantis
Netlify
Nimbula
Nimbus
OpenIO
OpenNebula
OpenStack
Oracle Cloud
OrionVM
Rackspace Cloud
Safe Swiss Cloud
Zadara
libvirt
libguestfs
OVirt
Virtual Machine Manager
Wakame-vdc
Vercel
Virtual Private Cloud OnDemand

 Category
 Commons
As a service
Content as a service
Data as a service
Desktop as a service
Function as a service
Infrastructure as a service
Integration platform as a service
Backend as a service
Network as a service
Platform as a service
Security as a service
Software as a service
Content as a service
Data as a service
Desktop as a service
Function as a service
Infrastructure as a service
Integration platform as a service
Backend as a service
Network as a service
Platform as a service
Security as a service
Software as a service
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Content as a service
	Bullet Point 2: Data as a service
	Bullet Point 3: Desktop as a service
	Bullet Point 4: Function as a service
	Bullet Point 5: Infrastructure as a service
	Bullet Point 6: Integration platform as a service
	Bullet Point 7: Backend as a service
	Bullet Point 8: Network as a service
	Bullet Point 9: Platform as a service
	Bullet Point 10: Security as a service
	Bullet Point 11: Software as a service
Technologies
Cloud database
Cloud storage
Data centers
Distributed file system for cloud
Hardware virtualization
Internet
Native cloud application
Networking
Security
Structured storage
Virtual appliance
Web APIs
Virtual private cloud
Cloud database
Cloud storage
Data centers
Distributed file system for cloud
Hardware virtualization
Internet
Native cloud application
Networking
Security
Structured storage
Virtual appliance
Web APIs
Virtual private cloud
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Cloud database
	Bullet Point 2: Cloud storage
	Bullet Point 3: Data centers
	Bullet Point 4: Distributed file system for cloud
	Bullet Point 5: Hardware virtualization
	Bullet Point 6: Internet
	Bullet Point 7: Native cloud application
	Bullet Point 8: Networking
	Bullet Point 9: Security
	Bullet Point 10: Structured storage
	Bullet Point 11: Virtual appliance
	Bullet Point 12: Web APIs
	Bullet Point 13: Virtual private cloud
Applications
Box
Cloud-native processor
Dropbox
Google
Workspace
Drive
HP Cloud (closed)
IBM Cloud
Microsoft
Office 365
OneDrive
Nextcloud
Oracle Cloud
Rackspace
Salesforce
Workday
Zoho
Box
Cloud-native processor
Dropbox
Google
Workspace
Drive
HP Cloud (closed)
IBM Cloud
Microsoft
Office 365
OneDrive
Nextcloud
Oracle Cloud
Rackspace
Salesforce
Workday
Zoho
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Box
	Bullet Point 2: Cloud-native processor
	Bullet Point 3: Dropbox
	Bullet Point 4: Google
Workspace
Drive
	Bullet Point 5: HP Cloud (closed)
	Bullet Point 6: IBM Cloud
	Bullet Point 7: Microsoft
Office 365
OneDrive
	Bullet Point 8: Nextcloud
	Bullet Point 9: Oracle Cloud
	Bullet Point 10: Rackspace
	Bullet Point 11: Salesforce
	Bullet Point 12: Workday
	Bullet Point 13: Zoho
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Workspace
	Bullet Point 2: Drive
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Office 365
	Bullet Point 2: OneDrive
Platforms
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
AppScale
Box
Bluemix
CloudBolt
Cloud Foundry
Cloud-native processor
Cocaine (PaaS)
Creatio
Engine Yard
Helion
GE Predix
Google App Engine
GreenQloud
Heroku
IBM Cloud
Inktank
Jelastic
Microsoft Azure
MindSphere
Netlify
Oracle Cloud
OutSystems
openQRM
OpenShift
PythonAnywhere
RightScale
Scalr
Force.com
SAP Cloud Platform
Splunk
Vercel
VMware vCloud Air
WaveMaker
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
AppScale
Box
Bluemix
CloudBolt
Cloud Foundry
Cloud-native processor
Cocaine (PaaS)
Creatio
Engine Yard
Helion
GE Predix
Google App Engine
GreenQloud
Heroku
IBM Cloud
Inktank
Jelastic
Microsoft Azure
MindSphere
Netlify
Oracle Cloud
OutSystems
openQRM
OpenShift
PythonAnywhere
RightScale
Scalr
Force.com
SAP Cloud Platform
Splunk
Vercel
VMware vCloud Air
WaveMaker
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Alibaba Cloud
	Bullet Point 2: Amazon Web Services
	Bullet Point 3: AppScale
	Bullet Point 4: Box
	Bullet Point 5: Bluemix
	Bullet Point 6: CloudBolt
	Bullet Point 7: Cloud Foundry
	Bullet Point 8: Cloud-native processor
	Bullet Point 9: Cocaine (PaaS)
	Bullet Point 10: Creatio
	Bullet Point 11: Engine Yard
	Bullet Point 12: Helion
	Bullet Point 13: GE Predix
	Bullet Point 14: Google App Engine
	Bullet Point 15: GreenQloud
	Bullet Point 16: Heroku
	Bullet Point 17: IBM Cloud
	Bullet Point 18: Inktank
	Bullet Point 19: Jelastic
	Bullet Point 20: Microsoft Azure
	Bullet Point 21: MindSphere
	Bullet Point 22: Netlify
	Bullet Point 23: Oracle Cloud
	Bullet Point 24: OutSystems
	Bullet Point 25: openQRM
	Bullet Point 26: OpenShift
	Bullet Point 27: PythonAnywhere
	Bullet Point 28: RightScale
	Bullet Point 29: Scalr
	Bullet Point 30: Force.com
	Bullet Point 31: SAP Cloud Platform
	Bullet Point 32: Splunk
	Bullet Point 33: Vercel
	Bullet Point 34: VMware vCloud Air
	Bullet Point 35: WaveMaker
Infrastructure
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
Abiquo Enterprise Edition
CloudStack
Citrix Cloud
Deft
DigitalOcean
EMC Atmos
Eucalyptus
Fujitsu
Google Cloud Platform
GreenButton
GreenQloud
IBM Cloud
iland
Joyent
Linode
Lunacloud
Microsoft Azure
Mirantis
Netlify
Nimbula
Nimbus
OpenIO
OpenNebula
OpenStack
Oracle Cloud
OrionVM
Rackspace Cloud
Safe Swiss Cloud
Zadara
libvirt
libguestfs
OVirt
Virtual Machine Manager
Wakame-vdc
Vercel
Virtual Private Cloud OnDemand
Alibaba Cloud
Amazon Web Services
Abiquo Enterprise Edition
CloudStack
Citrix Cloud
Deft
DigitalOcean
EMC Atmos
Eucalyptus
Fujitsu
Google Cloud Platform
GreenButton
GreenQloud
IBM Cloud
iland
Joyent
Linode
Lunacloud
Microsoft Azure
Mirantis
Netlify
Nimbula
Nimbus
OpenIO
OpenNebula
OpenStack
Oracle Cloud
OrionVM
Rackspace Cloud
Safe Swiss Cloud
Zadara
libvirt
libguestfs
OVirt
Virtual Machine Manager
Wakame-vdc
Vercel
Virtual Private Cloud OnDemand
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Alibaba Cloud
	Bullet Point 2: Amazon Web Services
	Bullet Point 3: Abiquo Enterprise Edition
	Bullet Point 4: CloudStack
	Bullet Point 5: Citrix Cloud
	Bullet Point 6: Deft
	Bullet Point 7: DigitalOcean
	Bullet Point 8: EMC Atmos
	Bullet Point 9: Eucalyptus
	Bullet Point 10: Fujitsu
	Bullet Point 11: Google Cloud Platform
	Bullet Point 12: GreenButton
	Bullet Point 13: GreenQloud
	Bullet Point 14: IBM Cloud
	Bullet Point 15: iland
	Bullet Point 16: Joyent
	Bullet Point 17: Linode
	Bullet Point 18: Lunacloud
	Bullet Point 19: Microsoft Azure
	Bullet Point 20: Mirantis
	Bullet Point 21: Netlify
	Bullet Point 22: Nimbula
	Bullet Point 23: Nimbus
	Bullet Point 24: OpenIO
	Bullet Point 25: OpenNebula
	Bullet Point 26: OpenStack
	Bullet Point 27: Oracle Cloud
	Bullet Point 28: OrionVM
	Bullet Point 29: Rackspace Cloud
	Bullet Point 30: Safe Swiss Cloud
	Bullet Point 31: Zadara
	Bullet Point 32: libvirt
	Bullet Point 33: libguestfs
	Bullet Point 34: OVirt
	Bullet Point 35: Virtual Machine Manager
	Bullet Point 36: Wakame-vdc
	Bullet Point 37: Vercel
	Bullet Point 38: Virtual Private Cloud OnDemand
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1:  Category
	Bullet Point 2:  Commons
showvteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Daniel Davis Jr.
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)

 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons
History
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Beacon
	Bullet Point 2: Broadcasting
	Bullet Point 3: Cable protection system
	Bullet Point 4: Cable TV
	Bullet Point 5: Communications satellite
	Bullet Point 6: Computer network
	Bullet Point 7: Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
	Bullet Point 8: Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
	Bullet Point 9: Drums
	Bullet Point 10: Edholm's law
	Bullet Point 11: Electrical telegraph
	Bullet Point 12: Fax
	Bullet Point 13: Heliographs
	Bullet Point 14: Hydraulic telegraph
	Bullet Point 15: Information Age
	Bullet Point 16: Information revolution
	Bullet Point 17: Internet
	Bullet Point 18: Mass media
	Bullet Point 19: Mobile phone
Smartphone
	Bullet Point 20: Optical telecommunication
	Bullet Point 21: Optical telegraphy
	Bullet Point 22: Pager
	Bullet Point 23: Photophone
	Bullet Point 24: Prepaid mobile phone
	Bullet Point 25: Radio
	Bullet Point 26: Radiotelephone
	Bullet Point 27: Satellite communications
	Bullet Point 28: Semaphore
	Bullet Point 29: Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
	Bullet Point 30: Smoke signals
	Bullet Point 31: Telecommunications history
	Bullet Point 32: Telautograph
	Bullet Point 33: Telegraphy
	Bullet Point 34: Teleprinter (teletype)
	Bullet Point 35: Telephone
	Bullet Point 36: The Telephone Cases
	Bullet Point 37: Television
digital
streaming
	Bullet Point 38: Undersea telegraph line
	Bullet Point 39: Videotelephony
	Bullet Point 40: Whistled language
	Bullet Point 41: Wireless revolution
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: audio
	Bullet Point 2: DCT
	Bullet Point 3: image
	Bullet Point 4: video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Internet video
	Bullet Point 2: online video platform
	Bullet Point 3: social media
	Bullet Point 4: streaming
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Smartphone
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: device
	Bullet Point 2: MOSFET
	Bullet Point 3: transistor
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: digital
	Bullet Point 2: streaming
The webpage contains an image of a Telecom-icon.svg here.
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Daniel Davis Jr.
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Daniel Davis Jr.
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Nasir Ahmed
	Bullet Point 2: Edwin Howard Armstrong
	Bullet Point 3: Mohamed M. Atalla
	Bullet Point 4: John Logie Baird
	Bullet Point 5: Paul Baran
	Bullet Point 6: John Bardeen
	Bullet Point 7: Alexander Graham Bell
	Bullet Point 8: Emile Berliner
	Bullet Point 9: Tim Berners-Lee
	Bullet Point 10: Francis Blake (telephone)
	Bullet Point 11: Jagadish Chandra Bose
	Bullet Point 12: Charles Bourseul
	Bullet Point 13: Walter Houser Brattain
	Bullet Point 14: Vint Cerf
	Bullet Point 15: Claude Chappe
	Bullet Point 16: Yogen Dalal
	Bullet Point 17: Daniel Davis Jr.
	Bullet Point 18: Donald Davies
	Bullet Point 19: Amos Dolbear
	Bullet Point 20: Thomas Edison
	Bullet Point 21: Lee de Forest
	Bullet Point 22: Philo Farnsworth
	Bullet Point 23: Reginald Fessenden
	Bullet Point 24: Elisha Gray
	Bullet Point 25: Oliver Heaviside
	Bullet Point 26: Robert Hooke
	Bullet Point 27: Erna Schneider Hoover
	Bullet Point 28: Harold Hopkins
	Bullet Point 29: Gardiner Greene Hubbard
	Bullet Point 30: Internet pioneers
	Bullet Point 31: Bob Kahn
	Bullet Point 32: Dawon Kahng
	Bullet Point 33: Charles K. Kao
	Bullet Point 34: Narinder Singh Kapany
	Bullet Point 35: Hedy Lamarr
	Bullet Point 36: Innocenzo Manzetti
	Bullet Point 37: Guglielmo Marconi
	Bullet Point 38: Robert Metcalfe
	Bullet Point 39: Antonio Meucci
	Bullet Point 40: Samuel Morse
	Bullet Point 41: Jun-ichi Nishizawa
	Bullet Point 42: Charles Grafton Page
	Bullet Point 43: Radia Perlman
	Bullet Point 44: Alexander Stepanovich Popov
	Bullet Point 45: Tivadar Puskás
	Bullet Point 46: Johann Philipp Reis
	Bullet Point 47: Claude Shannon
	Bullet Point 48: Almon Brown Strowger
	Bullet Point 49: Henry Sutton
	Bullet Point 50: Charles Sumner Tainter
	Bullet Point 51: Nikola Tesla
	Bullet Point 52: Camille Tissot
	Bullet Point 53: Alfred Vail
	Bullet Point 54: Thomas A. Watson
	Bullet Point 55: Charles Wheatstone
	Bullet Point 56: Vladimir K. Zworykin
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Coaxial cable
	Bullet Point 2: Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
	Bullet Point 3: Free-space optical communication
	Bullet Point 4: Molecular communication
	Bullet Point 5: Radio waves
wireless
	Bullet Point 6: Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: optical fiber
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: data transmission circuit
	Bullet Point 2: telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Bandwidth
	Bullet Point 2: Links
	Bullet Point 3: Nodes
terminal
	Bullet Point 4: Network switching
circuit
packet
	Bullet Point 5: Telephone exchange
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: terminal
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: circuit
	Bullet Point 2: packet
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Space-division
	Bullet Point 2: Frequency-division
	Bullet Point 3: Time-division
	Bullet Point 4: Polarization-division
	Bullet Point 5: Orbital angular-momentum
	Bullet Point 6: Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Communication protocol
	Bullet Point 2: Computer network
	Bullet Point 3: Data transmission
	Bullet Point 4: Store and forward
	Bullet Point 5: Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Cellular network
	Bullet Point 2: Ethernet
	Bullet Point 3: ISDN
	Bullet Point 4: LAN
	Bullet Point 5: Mobile
	Bullet Point 6: NGN
	Bullet Point 7: Public Switched Telephone
	Bullet Point 8: Radio
	Bullet Point 9: Television
	Bullet Point 10: Telex
	Bullet Point 11: UUCP
	Bullet Point 12: WAN
	Bullet Point 13: Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: ARPANET
	Bullet Point 2: BITNET
	Bullet Point 3: CYCLADES
	Bullet Point 4: FidoNet
	Bullet Point 5: Internet
	Bullet Point 6: Internet2
	Bullet Point 7: JANET
	Bullet Point 8: NPL network
	Bullet Point 9: Toasternet
	Bullet Point 10: Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Africa
	Bullet Point 2: Americas
North
South
	Bullet Point 3: Antarctica
	Bullet Point 4: Asia
	Bullet Point 5: Europe
	Bullet Point 6: Oceania
	Bullet Point 7: (Global telecommunications regulation bodies)
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: North
	Bullet Point 2: South
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)
Global telecommunications regulation bodies
Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1:  Telecommunication portal
	Bullet Point 2:  Category
	Bullet Point 3:  Outline
	Bullet Point 4:  Commons
showAuthority control National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA
The webpage contains an image of a Edit this at Wikidata here.
National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Spain
	Bullet Point 2: France
	Bullet Point 3: BnF data
	Bullet Point 4: Germany
	Bullet Point 5: Israel
	Bullet Point 6: United States
	Bullet Point 7: Japan
	Bullet Point 8: Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
	Bullet Point 2: Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
	Bullet Point 3: NARA
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Internet&oldid=1157179241
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Internet
	Bullet Point 2: 1969 establishments in the United States
	Bullet Point 3: American inventions
	Bullet Point 4: Computer-related introductions in 1969
	Bullet Point 5: Computer-related introductions in 1989
	Bullet Point 6: Cultural globalization
	Bullet Point 7: Digital technology
	Bullet Point 8: Mass media technology
	Bullet Point 9: Telecommunications
	Bullet Point 10: New media
	Bullet Point 11: Promotion and marketing communications
	Bullet Point 12: Public services
	Bullet Point 13: Telegraphy
	Bullet Point 14: Transport systems
	Bullet Point 15: Virtual reality
	Bullet Point 16: Main topic articles
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Pages using the Graph extension
	Bullet Point 2: Pages with disabled graphs
	Bullet Point 3: Webarchive template wayback links
	Bullet Point 4: CS1 maint: url-status
	Bullet Point 5: All articles with dead external links
	Bullet Point 6: Articles with dead external links from November 2020
	Bullet Point 7: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list
	Bullet Point 8: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)
	Bullet Point 9: Pages containing links to subscription-only content
	Bullet Point 10: Articles with short description
	Bullet Point 11: Short description is different from Wikidata
	Bullet Point 12: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
	Bullet Point 13: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
	Bullet Point 14: Articles needing additional references from January 2021
	Bullet Point 15: All articles needing additional references
	Bullet Point 16: Use American English from August 2020
	Bullet Point 17: All Wikipedia articles written in American English
	Bullet Point 18: Use dmy dates from August 2020
	Bullet Point 19: Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2011
	Bullet Point 20: All articles containing potentially dated statements
	Bullet Point 21: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016
	Bullet Point 22: All accuracy disputes
	Bullet Point 23: Articles with disputed statements from December 2018
	Bullet Point 24: All articles with vague or ambiguous time
	Bullet Point 25: Vague or ambiguous time from March 2020
	Bullet Point 26: Articles to be expanded from July 2021
	Bullet Point 27: All articles to be expanded
	Bullet Point 28: Articles using small message boxes
	Bullet Point 29: Free-content attribution
	Bullet Point 30: Free content from UNESCO
	Bullet Point 31: Pages using Sister project links with default search
	Bullet Point 32: Articles with BNE identifiers
	Bullet Point 33: Articles with BNF identifiers
	Bullet Point 34: Articles with BNFdata identifiers
	Bullet Point 35: Articles with GND identifiers
	Bullet Point 36: Articles with J9U identifiers
	Bullet Point 37: Articles with LCCN identifiers
	Bullet Point 38: Articles with NDL identifiers
	Bullet Point 39: Articles with NKC identifiers
	Bullet Point 40: Articles with EMU identifiers
	Bullet Point 41: Articles with HDS identifiers
	Bullet Point 42: Articles with NARA identifiers
Articles with dead external links from November 2020
Pages containing links to subscription-only content
Short description is different from Wikidata
Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
Articles needing additional references from January 2021
All articles needing additional references
All Wikipedia articles written in American English
Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2011
All articles containing potentially dated statements
Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016
Articles with disputed statements from December 2018
All articles with vague or ambiguous time
Pages using Sister project links with default search
This page was last edited on 26 May 2023, at 21:35 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Edit preview settings
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1:  This page was last edited on 26 May 2023, at 21:35 (UTC).
	Bullet Point 2: Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
This page was last edited on 26 May 2023, at 21:35 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: Privacy policy
	Bullet Point 2: About Wikipedia
	Bullet Point 3: Disclaimers
	Bullet Point 4: Contact Wikipedia
	Bullet Point 5: Mobile view
	Bullet Point 6: Developers
	Bullet Point 7: Statistics
	Bullet Point 8: Cookie statement
	Bullet Point 9: Edit preview settings
Unordered List:
	Bullet Point 1: 
	Bullet Point 2: 
The webpage contains an image of a Wikimedia Foundation here.
The webpage contains an image of a Powered by MediaWiki here.
You can toggle between a fixed width and full width by clicking this button.